The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Princess Sophia, by E. F. Benson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Princess Sophia

Author: E. F. Benson

Release Date: October 22, 2018 [EBook #58150]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PRINCESS SOPHIA ***




Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images available at The Internet Archive)







                         _UNIFORM WITH THIS VOLUME_


            SIR GEORGE TRESSADY.                _Mrs. Humphry Ward._
            THE FARM OF THE DAGGER.               _Eden Phillpotts._
            THE EXPENSIVE MISS DU CANE.            _S. Macnaughtan._
            LADY ROSE’S DAUGHTER.               _Mrs. Humphry Ward._
            THE PROFESSOR ON THE CASE.           _Jacques Futrelle._
            LOVE AND THE SOUL HUNTERS.             _John O. Hobbes._
            THE SECRET OF THE LEAGUE.               _Ernest Bramah._
            VALERIE UPTON.                    _Miss A. D. Sedgwick._
            THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON.                _H. G. Wells._
            KATHARINE FRENSHAM.                 _Beatrice Harraden._
            THE WAR OF THE CAROLINAS.          _Meredith Nicholson._
            HISTORY OF DAVID GRIEVE.            _Mrs. Humphry Ward._
            ROMANCE.                                _Joseph Conrad._
            THE PRIMROSE PATH.                      _Mrs. Oliphant._
            KIPPS.                                    _H. G. Wells._
            MARRIAGE OF WILLIAM ASHE.           _Mrs. Humphry Ward._
            THOMPSON’S PROGRESS.             _C. J. Cutcliffe Hyne._
            CYNTHIA’S WAY.                       _Mrs. A. Sidgwick._
            RAFFLES.                                _E. W. Hornung._
            FRENCH NAN.                    _Agnes & Egerton Castle._
            THE FOOD OF THE GODS.                     _H. G. Wells._
            MARCELLA.                           _Mrs. Humphry Ward._
            SPRINGTIME.                              _H. C. Bailey._
            MOONFLEET.                           _J. Meade Falkner._
            WHITE FANG.                               _Jack London._
            LOVE AND MR. LEWISHAM.                    _H. G. Wells._
            ROBERT ELSMERE.                     _Mrs. Humphry Ward._
            THE BATTLE OF THE STRONG.               _Sir G. Parker._
            THE AMERICAN PRISONER.                _Eden Phillpotts._
            FORTUNE OF CHRISTINA M‘NAB.            _S. Macnaughtan._
            THE AMERICAN.                             _Henry James._
            SELAH HARRISON.                        _S. Macnaughtan._
            A LAME DOG’S DIARY.                    _S. Macnaughtan._

                      _And Many Other Equally Popular
                            Copyright Novels._

                            NELSON’S LIBRARY.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: The princess swept by him with an air of ineffable
disdain.]




                            [Illustration:

                                  THE
                               PRINCESS
                                SOPHIA

                             E. F. BENSON

                           THOMAS NELSON AND
                                 SONS]




                                  TO
                            MY DEAR FRIEND
                            CRITIC, SISTER
                       I AFFECTIONATELY DEDICATE
                               THIS BOOK
                             E. F. BENSON




                               CONTENTS.


      INTRODUCTORY                                                     5

   I. THE GIRL IS MOTHER TO THE WOMAN                                 17

  II. A FOOL COMES TO RHODOPÉ                                         33

 III. MARRIAGE-BELLS AND SYSTEMS                                      50

  IV. THE LAST DAYS OF PRINCE DEMETRIUS                               65

   V. ENTER THE CENTIPEDE                                             72

  VI. THE NEW MEMBER                                                  93

 VII. THE PRINCESS’S CLUB                                            107

VIII. PLOTS AND COUNTER-PLOTS                                        135

  IX. THE PRINCESS RETURNS                                           167

   X. THE PRINCESS IS VERY MUCH THERE                                184

  XI. A FOOL LEAVES RHODOPÉ                                          200

 XII. THE EDUCATION OF THE HEIR-APPARENT                             209

XIII. THE PLAGUE-SPOT SPREADS                                        239

 XIV. BANG!                                                          257

      EPILOGUE                                                       273




                         THE PRINCESS SOPHIA.




INTRODUCTORY.


The independent principality of Rhodopé lies, as everyone knows, on the
wooded coast-line of Albania. Its territory, no greater than the area of
the English counties palatine, is triangular in shape, the base of the
triangle (a line some twenty miles long if measured as the crow flies,
but more like a hundred if we follow the indentations and promontories
of that superbly fertile land), being washed by the waters of the
Adriatic. It is bounded on the south by the kingdom of Greece, and up to
its northern border extends the benign rule of that most pitiful and
Christian monarch the Sultan of Turkey.

Rhodopé preserved during the Græco-Turkish War of 1897 (I am almost
ashamed to remind my readers of events so recent) a strict neutrality,
though the offers made it by both one side and the other might well have
been enough to turn a less level head than that of Prince Leonard, the
ruling sovereign. For an Imperial Iradé, with promise of a definite
Hatt (I think I have the terms correctly), arrived from the most
Christian monarch, prospectively granting the cession of Corfu to the
Prince, when Greece lay crushed beneath the heel of the Sultan, if only
his beloved brother (so the Sultan was pleased to say) would join the
cause of the imminently victorious Turks; while from the other side a
cleverly worded sketch pictured the immense advantage it would be to
Rhodopé if by an extension of its territory it was so arranged that the
Upper Valley of the river Strypos--the Golden River, as it is not
inaptly named--a plain of surpassing fertility, and odorous with the
finest growths of tobacco, should pour its revenues into the coffers of
the Prince.

Indeed, Prince Leonard, when these two propositions, which arrived
almost simultaneously, were under his consideration, must have had a
strong head not to have been overcome by the intoxication of one or the
other prospect. He knew--and sober and bald politicians tell me that he
did not overestimate the importance of his position (a malady most
incident to autocrats)--that the balance of power, inevitably
determining the result of the war, as he sided with Turkey or Greece,
was in his hands; also he would have the singular pleasure of perhaps
playing the deuce with that wonderfully harmonious comic opera the
Concert of the Powers. A scribbled word from him would--and he was not
too sanguine in so believing--give him Corfu if the envelope of his
reply was addressed to Yildiz Kiosk, or, if to the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs at Athens, the nicotic valley of the Upper Strypos.

A glance at the map is sufficient to show that the key of the crisis was
assuredly his. If he allied himself with Greece, in a few hours his
artillery could be coolly shelling the fortress of Janina, the slow,
inevitable advance of the Turkish army down the defiles of the Melouna
Pass would be checked, and their overwhelming superiority of numbers
against a vastly inferior force would be neutralized. They could not
possibly advance into Greek territory leaving so important a town as
Janina in the hands of their enemy’s ally, and, indeed, the Sultan, with
his world-famous frankness, had confessed as much in his letter. His
Imperial Majesty might advance, if he pleased, through Thessaly;
meantime Prince Leonard, with his very adequate force of Albanians, men
of the mountain and the sea, and the best-drilled soldiers in the world,
would be quietly eating their way eastward, and at the end the Turks
would infallibly find themselves cut off in the enemy’s country. If, on
the other hand, the Sultan directed his first advance against Rhodopé,
the Greeks would stream through the eastern passes, attacking instead of
defending, and again take him in the rear. Besides, to advance into
Rhodopé much resembled an attempt to take a hornets’ nest by daylight.
For a score of years Prince Leonard had lavished the revenues of the
country on its army and navy; English and German officers had drilled
his men into a perfect machine of war; the steel of the great workshops
of the world had been perched in the mountainous and almost impregnable
passes into the principality; French engineers had exalted his valleys,
and brought low his hills, flinging down military roads east, west,
north, and south--the whole kingdom, a man might say, had been forged
into one cannon. Nor had the Prince neglected the defence of the
sea-board, though from the Turk there was little to fear in this regard.
The only two ports on that rocky coast--Mavromáti and Búlteck--have long
been the admiration of nautical Europe, and Gibraltar itself might learn
a lesson from the concealed galleries which defend these fire-belching
jaws of death.

On the other hand, supposing he allied himself with Constantinople, the
conclusion of the war, as it actually took place, was much easier of
demonstration, and quite as inevitable as the _Pons Asinorum_. Greece
had not the sinews to check the Turkish advance from the north-east.
What, then, would be her plight if Prince Leonard’s armed cruisers
battered Patras, and landed troops in the Peloponnese? A nut in a hinge,
a shuttlecock between two battledores, were in a more enviable position.

But, as we have seen, Prince Leonard held entirely aloof. He was an
autocrat, his will was subject to no controlling House, and he possessed
not only absolute authority over his principality, but commanded--which
is even better worth having--their complete devotion. What seemed right
in his never seemed otherwise than right in theirs; it was through his
glasses (the Prince is a little short-sighted) that his ministers
regarded the political outlook; and when it was known that he had
decided not to move in the matter, and his decision was communicated to
his Government, they were lost in admiration at this unique example of
princely prudence displayed in his resolve to remain neutral, just as
they would have seen a splendid flash of the old crusading spirit if he
had determined to side with the Greeks, or nodded their heads in silent
approval of his marvellous insight into practical politics if he had
joined the cause of the Crescent. The leader in the principal paper of
Rhodopé--though not an official organ--printed in large type, commended
in terms of the most extravagant praise the wisdom of their great
Prince, who saw what so many less divinely-gifted rulers have failed to
observe, that a nation’s first duty is to itself, and would not lightly
plunge his people into the horrors of war. Yet, even as the first
edition was cried through the streets, the staff of compositors were
cheerfully making pie of another leading article, prematurely set up,
which compared Prince Leonard to Cœur-de-Lion, and singled him out from
the whole of apathetic Europe as the champion who embraced the cause of
Christianity, as the only being to whom his religion was a reality, and
who would not suffer the accursed race to make havoc of Greece.

This premature leader sufficiently indicated the reputed bias--if so
well-balanced a mind can properly be said to have a bias--of the Prince.
His private sympathies, it is true, were entirely on the side of the
Greeks; he was twice related by marriage to their Royal Family, and he
loved the people who were so largely of the same blood as his own
inimitable Albanians--yet he would not take up the sword for them. The
_Rhodopé Courier_ had hit the nail on the head in its second leader: he
did not wish to plunge his people into a war which must be expensive and
might cost many lives, while, considered as a practical question, his
acute mind, with the aid of a Blue-book, a few jotted figures, a
meditative cigarette, soon revealed to him the fact that the Upper
Valley of the Strypos would not nearly repay him for the inevitable
outlay of a war. Moreover, the acquisition of this delightful piece of
country was not without its drawbacks. It would, he saw, have to be
garrisoned and fortified, for it lay open to any attack that might be
made (though strictly against the Sultan’s orders, as the Armenian
massacres had been) from Turkey. Just now he had but little money to
spend in such large operations, for a reason that will appear, and
though the _Rhodopé Courier_ knew nothing of this reason, the main lines
of its second leader were correct enough; war would be expensive both in
lives and money, and there was no sufficient interest at stake.

The Prince’s reasons against espousing the cause of Turkey are easily
and succinctly stated. He hated the Turks as warmly as he hated the
devil, regarding the two as synonymous; and he looked on them and their
deeds, their natures and their names with that quivering disgust with
which a tired man about to get into bed sees some poisonous reptile
coldly coiled in the sheets. He would as soon have allied himself with a
tribe of cobras. And so Rhodopé remained neutral.

This short disquisition about the Græco-Turkish War may, I am afraid,
appear out of place to those who follow me to the end of this historical
tale; but it seems not so to me. In the first place, it will be found to
have introduced the indulgent reader to the principality of Rhodopé, and
the character of its eminent Prince, now in his middle age; in the
second, it has rubbed up his memory about the Prince’s attitude with
regard to the war, and given the true reason for a course of conduct
which was so widely discussed and even so freely blamed; for it is true
that the Prince was hurt, though not in his resolve, by the comments of
the English Liberal press with which a news-cutting agency in the Strand
has for years supplied him, and especially by a paper signed by a large
majority of Liberal Members of Parliament. In the third place, it has
led up to the one little sore place in his life, which contributed to
his decision not to join his arms with those of Greece, indicated in his
communication to the House under the question of expense. For three
months before the war broke out, _i.e._, in December, 1896, he had paid
at great sacrifice an enormous sum of money to his mother, the Princess
Sophia, and temporarily, at least, the resources of his country were
crippled. The Government had strongly approved his action in so doing,
and sent him a message of affectionate sympathy and condolence when the
reason was privately made known to them. For his mother’s debts were
inexcusable; her jointure was ample to enable her to live as befitted
her station, had it not been for the one life-long weakness of that
enchanting woman: she was a gambler, hardened and inveterate.

It is difficult to estimate the value of a factor like this in its
effect on any life, and when it has played so important a part in a
career as it played in the case of Prince Leonard of Rhodopé, almost
impossible. Certain it is that now in his middle age he sees little of
his mother, for by his orders, when he ascended the throne on her
abdication a score of years ago, she was forbidden ever again to set
foot in Rhodopé, and the cares of State are so numerous and exigent to
so conscientious a Prince that he leaves his country at the outside for
a short month in the year, and sometimes not at all. Some ten days of
this little holiday, it is true, he makes a rule of spending with his
mother, the Princess Sophia, in her charming villa on the olive-clad
hills above Monte Carlo; but one would think there could be no great
intimacy between so diverse-minded a pair. But of this the reader will
judge later. For the present it may be said that the Princess’s time is
largely spent at the tables, while the Prince, on ascending the throne
of Rhodopé, suppressed once and for all the gambling which at one time
threatened to undermine the very foundations of the State. Never has
reformer started on so Herculean a task, and, indeed, the work of
building up was less arduous than the work of pulling down, for it was
easier for him to make a nation of warriors out of his Albanians than it
was to turn a medley of gamblers into sober-minded citizens, and
disprove to them that lying creed which says that in chance alone do we
find the charm and the lord of life. Some say he went too far in this
hunting out of the worship of the false and fickle goddess of luck, and
in the destruction of her groves or gambling-houses. Even the
comparatively unexciting game of knuckle-bones, the lineal descendant,
or you might say the living incarnation, of the old Greek astragali (and
thus of archæological interest), he sternly suppressed. For this,
however, there was another sufficient though somewhat quaint reason,
since the son of one of the small farmers near Mavromáti, an idiot in
all other respects, was so consummate a genius at the game that he had
won the greater part of the copper currency of Rhodopé at it, and there
was literally a penny famine. Here his idiocy came in, for his mental
deficiency, backed by his native Albanian obstinacy or firmness, caused
him to refuse to part with any of his copper, even though offered 10 per
cent. extra on the franc. The Prince dealt with the question with his
accustomed acumen. He allowed the poor boy to keep his copper, but made
the game of knuckle-bones illegal. This acted in the way he had
foreseen it would. The hoard of copper, a bulky sackful, could no
longer grow; the charm of amassing was gone, and before long the idiot
was obliging enough to take gold and silver in exchange.

But such radical measures, if they erred at all, erred on the right
side. The abuse was radical; the cure must be radical too. Step by step
the gambling-houses were put down, one by one the gamblers were induced
to turn to a pursuit in which they could enrich themselves without
impoverishing others; the love of gain which is so deeply enrooted in
the peasant races of East Europe found a less sensational fruition, and
Rhodopé was knit together into the principality it now is--a cannon, and
yet a garden of the Lord.

When I think of its smiling valleys and multitude of renovating rivers,
it often seems to me that Prince Leonard was certainly right in refusing
to go to war even against the unspeakable Turk. Nature has printed in
her boldest capitals her dictate to that happy kingdom not to concern
itself with the quarrels of its neighbours, else why did she build those
great ramparts of rocks on every side but one, where she has placed a
rocky and hungry shore, a stern ‘Trespassers will be prosecuted’ against
any who should dare attempt to violate this mountain sanctuary? It
cannot have been by a blind and purposeless stir of forces that she
ranged north and south of Rhodopé those spear-heads of stone on which
even the aspiring pine can fix no anchorage, and from which in winter
the snow slips like a fallen coverlet down to the less violent slopes
below. Surely some lesson was meant to be drawn from her disposition.
And, indeed, Prince Leonard had set the seal on her policy of isolation,
and it were an infirmity of purpose to go back on it; forts and
batteries endorsed those impregnable rocks and guarded the passes, and
it would be a regiment of steel who could win through. Nature’s lesson,
too, is no less clearly inscribed on the fertile plains which the
mountains guard, for the country is amply self-supporting. Broad
pastures line the brimming rivers, and the alluvial soil yields its
sixty-fold and hundred-fold in tobacco fields, and higher up in terraced
vineyards of volcanic earth. The very cigarette you are smoking was
born, I will be bold to say, in the fields of Prince Leonard, and only
bears the stamp of Cairo to show where it was cut and enveloped and
probably adulterated. Again, if you have never drunk the Château Vryssi
of 1893, yellow seal, there is as yet no excuse for you to label this a
sour world. A man might search for a month in Rhodopé, yet never find a
beggar, nor even one to whom old age brought indigence. Conscription
obliges every male to serve in the army for five years, and after that
he can retire on a pension large enough to keep want from the door and
till his fields, and he must live extravagantly or very idly who does
not save his pension. Nor are the dwellers on the coast less fortunate;
mullet and sole are legion in that sea, and in ten fathoms of water
grow the sponges with which the faces of half Europe are daily made
comparatively clean.

The towns are few in number; Mavromáti and Búlteck are the only ports,
and, in consequence, the only places of consideration on the coast,
Amandos, the capital, lying twelve miles inland, the only other city
numbering ten thousand souls. For the rest the valleys are peopled with
villages, each more clean and more like a box of toys than the last; and
I have often, when travelling there, sitting in the little _place_ of
some such hamlet, with its church, its meeting-place, its barracks and
its white-washed houses, momentarily expected that some paste-board door
would open, and out would pour an operatic chorus of genuine shepherds
and shepherdesses.

It was not always so. Twenty years ago each village would boast a score
of gaming-houses, its hundred rich folk, and its five hundred poor ones.
Even then few were beggars, owing to the immeasurable fertility of the
land; but many were labourers on another’s ground who should have been
lords of their own. And it is the events by which Prince Leonard came to
the throne, and was enabled to rescue his kingdom from its imminent
dissolution in the lifetime of his mother, the reigning Princess Sophia
of Rhodopé, that this story tells.




CHAPTER I.

THE GIRL IS MOTHER TO THE WOMAN.


Princess Sophia’s father, the reigning Prince Leonard’s grandfather, was
a man extraordinarily truculent in disposition, with a hand of iron
under no velvet glove, and a temper frankly diabolical. His wife, the
Grand Duchess Fedora, had died in giving birth to his only child, the
Princess Sophia; and so long as the girl grew up strong and healthy, he
had no thoughts of attempting to take to himself another partner. In
this he acted contrarily to the bias of mankind, who would see in the
education of a daughter the need of a mother’s hand. Not so thought
Prince Demetrius. Had Sophia died, there would then be an undeniable
necessity for marrying again, and so continuing his line, and
disappointing the hopes of the cousin who stood next the throne, a man
abhorrent to him; but as long as she lived, such a course appeared to
him to be altogether outside the region of the vaguest consideration.
Indeed, his first venture--though the word is scarcely apt for so chill
a piece of business--had not been altogether fortunate. The Princess
Fedora had been a mild and ailing woman, with weak and swimming blue
eyes, of an uncertain manner, and of notable mediocrity, and the secret
satisfaction which her husband at first used to feel in making her jump
soon lost its edge when he saw how easily, how unintentionally even, the
thing could be done. A voice raised ever so little, one raucous and
guttural exclamation, though half stifled, was enough to make that poor
lady skip or swoon. In fine, he got tired of her swoonings, and was in
danger, when she died, of losing the keenness of his overbearing and
furious temper from mere contact with one so grossly meek and of so
contemptible a spirit, even as a sword that has often to cut cotton-wool
is soon blunted.

But before long Sophia made him feel his own man again. She grew up with
the foot of the roe-deer and the eye of the hawk, and her imperative
craving for excitement in some form or other kept her father on
incessant tenterhooks as to what she might choose to do next. By no
means the earliest of her escapades was at the age of ten, when he found
her sitting with the grooms in the stable-yard, cross-legged on the
horse-block, and smoking a cigarette. Her current governess, an
estimable and incompetent Frenchwoman, who could play more scales in a
minute and speak more words in five different languages with absolute
correctness of accent than any governess yet known to exist on this
imperfect earth, was bedewing the corner of the yard with impotent tears
while Her Royal Highness smoked, and indulged between the whiffs in
shocking slang expressions to the English groom. At this prodigious
moment her father came in from his ride, saw the governess cowering and
wringing her hands in the corner, and the Hope of Rhodopé flicking the
ash off her cigarette with the apparent mastery of habit. His face
expressed no surprise, though he cast one furious glance at Mademoiselle
Fifine, and dismounting from his horse, he walked to where his daughter
was sitting. She had not seen him till he had well turned the corner
into the yard, and knew that he must have observed her employment; and
convinced of this, she had not resorted to what would have been the
ordinary young lady’s pitiful subterfuge on such an extreme occasion,
and either dropped her cigarette, or handed it behind her back to the
groom. She was far too defiant and proud for such paltriness of conduct,
and she smoked quietly on, a slight patter of fear in her heart, but
outwardly calm.

Her father approached in silence, and as he drew near Sophia
respectfully got up. Still in silence he sat down on the horse-block,
and Sophia stood beside him. If he had only boxed her ears and called
her a ‘dirty, vulgar little cat,’ she would have drawn a sigh of relief,
but this silence was intolerably ominous. She was the first to break it.

‘I am smoking a cigarette, papa,’ she said frankly, ‘and I find it
excellent.’

He did not look at her, but only took out his own cigarette-case and
laid it by his side.

‘So I see,’ he said; ‘and when you have finished that, you shall have
another. These, too, are excellent cigarettes; I have plenty of them.’

‘Thanks; you are very kind, but I think one will be enough,’ remarked
Sophia.

‘It may be, but you will have another if it is not.’ Then turning to the
stablemen: ‘Stop where you are, all of you,’ he said. ‘I wish you to see
the Princess Sophia smoking till she has had enough.’

Sophia understood, and her small spirit was up in indignant revolt.
Already she had had nearly enough, and the cigarette was yet only half
consumed. Each puff became a more palpable pang. Meantime Mademoiselle
Fifine had approached.

‘Oh, sir,’ she said tremulously, ‘Princess Sophia has been very naughty,
and I could not stop her. But make her stop; perhaps she will obey you.
If she smokes any more, she will die of it, for already she is growing
very pale.’

The Prince turned to the distressed governess with a malign light in his
eye.

‘As you say, you could not stop her,’ he said. ‘You had better get home
and pack your boxes. I do not choose to retain the services of one who
cannot govern my daughter. You a governess!’ he cried, his voice rising
suddenly to a tone that the late Princess Fedora well knew. ‘Great and
merciful God!’

Sophia turned to her father.

‘Papa,’ she said, ‘I must go; I do not feel very well.’

‘You shall stop exactly where you are,’ he replied. ‘If you choose to
disgrace yourself, you shall do so in the way that I, and not you,
prefer.’

‘If I stop here as you order me,’ she said, ‘will you promise not to
send mademoiselle away? For indeed she did her best to stop me, but I
have a stronger will than she.’

‘I shall send her away anyhow,’ he replied, ‘and as surely you shall
stop here.’

The end was approaching; a paleness gathered on her cheek, and the
meanness of the impending calamity appalled her.

‘Before all the stablemen?’ she pleaded. ‘Bob will laugh at me so.’

‘Most probably,’ said her father dryly; ‘and the others too. I shall not
blame them.’

He sat tapping his boot with his riding-whip, not dreaming that he would
be disobeyed, and Sophia suddenly saw her chance. Throwing away the end
of her cigarette, she bolted round the corner of the stable like a
ferreted rabbit, and plunged into the thick bushes which lined the road.
Her father started up with an astonished oath, but he was too late, and
he turned a gorgon face to the group of stablemen whom he had told to
wait.

‘You set of idiotic deformities!’ he cried in a voice that would have
made Fedora tremble for a fortnight. ‘How dare you stand there gaping!
Get to your work, all of you! Never have I seen such a bandy-legged
crew!’

Sophia meanwhile crouched, quivering with a sickly feeling of nausea,
among the bushes. She was half afraid, half exultant at what she had
done. What the consequence might be she scarcely dared to think;
lifelong imprisonment in a dungeon seemed terribly possible. But she had
revolted; she had asserted her independence, and gloried in the deed,
like an early Christian martyr.

At the age of fourteen she proposed to her English tutor that he should
elope with her, and that they should together seek an appointment in a
circus. Failing his acceptance, she got him to teach her _écarté_. She
was quickly fascinated with the game and its subtly compounded mixture
of luck and skill. She insisted that he play her for counters, and her
exultation at winning a hundred of these off him in the course of an
hour expressed itself, as it subsequently appeared, prophetically.

‘When I grow up, Mr. Buckhurst,’ she said, ‘I shall be a gambler.’

And Mr. Buckhurst, counting out ten red and five white, thought it
extremely probable that she would.

       *       *       *       *       *

But the games of _écarté_ came to the ears of the Prince, and after a
thunderous dismissal of Mr. Buckhurst, he sent for his daughter.

‘I hear you are in the habit of playing _écarté_,’ he said. ‘To-night
you shall play with me. But I do not play for counters, like Mr.
Buckhurst; I play for francs.’

‘That will be even more delightful!’ exclaimed Sophia excitedly. ‘Mr.
Buckhurst would not play me for francs. He said that gambling was not a
proper employment for children. I am so glad you disagree with him. How
delightful it will be to play for real money!’

‘You shall see. Perhaps losing is not so pleasant as winning.’

‘But it will surely be exciting,’ said Sophia.

The Prince dined at six, and after dinner he sent for his daughter.

‘I have twenty francs, and some pennies,’ she said, turning out her
purse. ‘That will last a long time. I have been saving up, which is slow
work; but perhaps in this way I shall soon get twenty more.’

‘Perhaps,’ said her father. ‘What were you saving up for?’

Sophia flushed a little.

‘A Christmas present for Bob,’ she said.

Prince Demetrius found no reply handy, and he cut for deal.

Now, the Prince was one of the first _écarté_ players in Europe, and he
had resolved to teach his daughter a lesson on the same lines as the
lesson he had proposed to teach her in the stable-yard. He meant to go
on playing till Sophia was shorn of all her twenty francs, and after
that of all her pennies as well.

Sophia marked the king in the first hand, and turned it up in the
second, securing the odd trick on each occasion. On the third deal her
father held five small trumps, but only made the odd, Sophia holding
knave and ten. On the fourth deal Sophia won the odd trick, and no king
was marked, and her father pushed across to her four francs. The second
game was but a repetition of the first, only Prince Demetrius in this
case failed even to secure the odd. He growled out an oath as he gave
Sophia five francs, and that observant young person recorded a silent
vow that she personally would take her losings with the same calm
demeanour as she certainly intended to cultivate when she was so
fortunate as to win. But it was terribly exciting work to play for whole
silver francs, and every fibre and nerve in that wholesome little body
was stretched to play her best. The third game she also won, and
remarked consolingly to the Prince:

‘You have had the worst of the cards, sir,’ a phrase she had picked up
from the retired Buckhurst.

An hour later this strange pair were still at the game. The lesson
Prince Demetrius had determined to give his daughter was still
unlearned, for by her on the table glittered three gold napoleons, and
some seventeen francs in silver. She had enjoyed a most surprising run
of luck, and what was still more surprising to her father, she had
played throughout a safe and sober game, the very essence and spirit of
scientific success. Several times she had elected to play on a hand
which, as he saw when she played it, justified itself clearly indeed to
the adept, but held dazzling improbabilities to the beginner, with a
change of two cards, or perhaps one. At other times her bolder front had
reason to back it. Once, for instance, the Prince turned up the king,
and proposed for cards. She, with a moderate hand, refused, since the
odd trick would give him the game, and her chance of saving it lay in
that. As luck would have it, he had on this occasion held four small
clubs and one diamond, the same being trumps. She had held two diamonds,
a fair hand of hearts, and won all the tricks. The consequence of all
this was that at the end of an hour the thought of the lesson he should
give her had yielded place in the Prince’s mind to an increased feeling
of respect for his daughter, so proficient was her play, though only a
beginner, and to the adept’s joy in the game considered as a game and
unconcerned with moralities.

Nine o’clock came, and an hour after the Princess’s bedtime. But when a
raw-boned governess appeared at the door, and stood patiently waiting,
the Prince presently answered her with so tigerish a snarl, and so
strong an expression of his feelings toward her--Sophia had just marked
the king--that that lady retired to her bedroom in precipitate
confusion, and remembered him in her prayers. The pile by the Princess
had grown to a matter of eighty francs; the Prince had made more than
one bad mistake, and instead of teaching his daughter a lesson, he had
caused an unfounded suspicion to arise in her mind that he was only a
player of the second order.

Alas for the moral cause! That evening, which he had designed to be so
salutary a piece of education, was in reality the direct ancestor of the
profuse gaming-tables in the State of Rhodopé, and the threatener of its
entire ruin as a nation. Not only did Sophia become convinced that games
at cards were more entrancing than any other adventure, even than trying
to elope with a reluctant English tutor, but several times during the
game her father had exclaimed: ‘You have the luck of the devil, Sophia!’
and such an opinion from so expert a judge could not fail to produce a
deep impression on her, and fill her with wild hopes. Indeed, the truth
of it, to give the devil his due, was blatantly obvious. Doubtful cards
prospered in her hand, good cards exacted the full tale of their merit,
and what seemed impossible winners sometimes leaped in at the end,
established and trick-winning. Even Prince Demetrius, who knew more than
most men of the favours of the fickle jade, was impressed by the
decisions of Fortune. It seemed idle to struggle, and when on the stroke
of midnight he rose from the table, leaving Sophia with a balance of a
hundred and seventeen francs, he almost regretted that they had not
played for larger stakes, for the winner ever commanded his respect. His
daughter gathered up her money with carefully assumed carelessness, but
inward exultation.

‘You had the worst of the cards throughout, papa,’ she observed again.

‘I had,’ he said, then paused, and the gambler within him leaped to the
surface. ‘Oh, Sophia,’ he said, ‘with such a run of luck, and, to do you
justice, your own intuition, translated into terms of roulette, you
would in a year make a fortune at Monte Carlo sufficient to buy the
Ionian Isles.’

Her face lit up as the face of some village genius might light up one
receipt of a favourable opinion from a publisher about his manuscript
poems.

‘Oh, papa,’ she cried, ‘how splendid! Will you take me there?’

And thus the moral lesson fled shrieking from the room.

It was not only at the cards that a sort of spell seemed to shower
blessings on the girl; in that crisp and invigorating air she grew up to
tall and stately development, and the breezes of the mountains and the
perfume of flowers lent her their beauty. Other cosmetics she had none,
and when her maid pressed on her curlers for the hair, and washes for
the face, and dentrifices for her milk-white teeth, she threw the
obnoxious aids behind the grate. The superlative mildness of her mother
seemed to have cancelled with the ferocious temper of her father, and to
have produced in their daughter a winning yet imperial graciousness that
touched the heart of the people. It was her joy to scamper over the
country on her Hungarian horse, or to divide the waters of the Adriatic
with a plunge as of some quick-diving bird from the rocks, or in the
harvesttime she would wield a scythe in the fields, and laugh to see how
the other girls, daughters of the farmers, and inured to toil, would
vainly strive to keep pace with her fallen swathes. Yet it was with a
wonderful dignity that she received her father’s guests, and she was
royal to her finger-tips.

But most of all she loved the hour when the lamps were lit, and the
curtains drawn, and she and her father, or she and some visitor to the
Court, sat down and played _écarté_ or picquet. Sometimes a
baccarat-table would be made up, and that was even more enchanting, for
she loved the decision of pure chance, and bowed to it with the
unwavering devotion of the thoroughbred and single-hearted gambler. They
were no longer simple francs which were pushed across the table; bright
gold pieces scurried to and fro in breathless alternation, and she loved
to think of the miner who delved sweating in the earth, and the
gold-dust carried in boxes oversea, to supply the sinews of her
amusement.

The fame of her beauty and the charm of the girl, without which beauty
is a mask and a cipher, had gone out widely into the world, and already,
while she was not yet seventeen, royal blood and more than regal dulness
were kneeling at her feet. It was the frankness of her refusal, her
sheer astonishment at the unsuccessful, that kept others aloof. To marry
seemed to her an inconceivable thing. She had not yet met her match
either in the gallop or in rubicon bezique, a game which occupied her
greatly for a year or two; and to pass a lifetime with a man who could
not keep up with her in a scamper across country, or who would be a mere
whipped puppy in her ruthless hands at the cards, was outside the bounds
of possibility. Some of these unfortunate suitors were strangely, almost
comically, below the mark. They fell off their horses in the afternoon,
and were perpetually plunged in the swollen waters of the rubicon in the
evening. To pretend even to wear the guise of sympathy for their inane
misfortunes was a histrionic feat of which she was hopelessly incapable.

English travellers who have visited Rhodopé have always found themselves
greatly at home there, for the character of the two nations is
marvellously alike. To those of Rhodopé no less than to us has been
given a sublime self-sufficiency, moved only to a smiling and wondering
tolerance at the screams of France or the telegrams of incomprehensible
Emperors. The insular position of England accounts for this trait in our
case, and the walls of mountains round Rhodopé--as inviolable as the
sea--in the other. Both nations are profoundly tenacious rather than
assertive, both have a certain habit of stalking along to fulfil an
immutable destiny, an attitude which is characteristic of the races of
the North and shrewdly aggravating to those of the South. The
inhabitants of Rhodopé are neither to be driven nor to be led: they go
their own way with an almost sublime consciousness of the futility of
every other way, or, when they choose, stand as still as trees planted
by the waterside. It is unnecessary to remind the reader how closely
their royal line is related to our own, and thus it has come about from
community of blood no less than of nature that many of the Court
appointments are held by English-speaking folk, English also is the
language of diplomacy there, a unique phenomenon.

From her seventeenth to her twentieth year Sophia lived much in the
society of the English, and her greatest friend at this time was Lady
Blanche Amesbury, only daughter of the Marquis of Abbotsworthy, who held
the post of English Minister at the Court of Prince Demetrius. The two
were in many ways much alike: both loved to be in the saddle or the sea
all day, and community of tastes brought about a real friendship. It was
to Blanche that the Princess confided the deficiencies of the Grand Duke
Nicholas, a youth of about twenty-three, who was then being put through
his pre-matrimonial paces at Amandos. He was hopelessly in love with his
cousin Sophia, and the latter was prepared to give him a fair trial.
Indeed, the wooing of the Princess Sophia was not unlike the fairy
stories in which princesses sit at the top of hills of glass calmly
ready to wed whoever can ride a horse up to their side.

‘I do not require much,’ said this candid young lady to Blanche, as they
sat waiting for Nicholas to go out riding with them. ‘The man who
marries me must be passably good-looking. My cousin Nicholas is more
than that--indeed, I suppose he might be called handsome--_and_ he must
do one or two things well. He must either ride very well, or talk very
well, or play cards very well, or if he only plays roulette and games of
that kind, he must lose very well. _Voilà tout!_’

Blanche considered a moment.

‘We shall see about his riding this afternoon,’ she said. ‘As far as his
talking goes, I am afraid he will not do on that count. And this
evening, no doubt, you will see how he plays. But there are other
things--he is very rich; that is a good thing.’

‘How can you think me so mercenary!’ cried the Princess. ‘Besides, I
have the luck of the devil--papa has told me so more than once--and so I
shall win enough at cards to keep my head above water. Here he is!
Really he looks quite distinguished!’

The riding question was soon settled, for the Grand Duke put his toes
out and his heels in, and sawed the autumn air with a sharp elbow. And
Sophia shook her head to Blanche as they came in.

‘There is but one more chance,’ she said.

She and her cousin played rubicon bezique that night, and at first
Sophia thought that after all he might do. He played quickly, and marked
treble bezique in the first game, which raised him in her estimation.
But, oh Heaven! the humiliation which followed! He showed a miser’s
greed for his tale of tens and aces; he haggled over mere francs,
refusing to toss double or quits in napoleons; he preferred to make
certain of a small score rather than risk a large one; he let out
incidentally that he could not swim (‘Without any sense of shame, my
dear Blanche, without any sense of shame,’ said the Princess next day);
and finally, after four games, he said he was sure she was tired of
bezique (meaning that he was), kissed her hand, offered her his own,
coupled with his heart.

His visit was curtailed, and he left two days afterwards. Prince
Demetrius gloomily threatened his daughter with the prospect of being an
old maid all her life, but she only put her pretty nose in the air, and
said ‘Hoots!’--a word she had picked up from Blanche, and thought very
expressive of certain shades of feeling.




CHAPTER II.

A FOOL COMES TO RHODOPÉ.


Till the time she was twenty-one Princess Sophia lived quietly enough at
Amandos, paying visits occasionally abroad, but passing a full ten
months of the year in Rhodopé. Though she was often bored, she was
usually employed, for Prince Demetrius’ health had now for a year or two
been failing, and many of the lesser cares of state devolved on his
daughter. It must be confessed that during her father’s lifetime she
discharged these duties admirably, and has not always had the credit for
this, for the complete neglect of all her duties when she herself was on
the throne has effaced the memory of these earlier years. She presided
over the National Assembly--except on the comparatively few occasions
when her father was present--with a wonderful great dignity and grace,
and while listening to their debates and considering their resolutions
with all the care that they deserved, she never let the autocratic power
wielded by the Crown seem to pass from her control or grow effete. More
than once she used her power of veto, more than once she insisted on a
measure thrown out only by a narrow number of votes being put into
effect. But never--and in this she showed the true and right
understanding of autocratic government--did she reverse the decision of
a substantial majority.

But what the poor girl went through, what agonies of boredom, what
screaming tortures of ennui, what clenching of jaws which ached for a
yawn, what twitching of limbs which longed for the saddle, that august
body never guessed. The language of Rhodopé contains no such expression
as ‘local jurisdiction’ or ‘county council,’ and all questions which can
be thought to bear in the minutest way upon the interests of the country
are solemnly brought before the House.

‘My dear Blanche,’ she cried in despair, after a five hours’ sitting one
afternoon, ‘unless I die of it, I shall go stark mad. I have had to-day
to give a casting-vote as to whether the second book of Euclid shall be
included in the third standard of schools. What do I know of third
standards? And, indeed, I know as little of Euclid. On the top of that
it appeared that Yanni Tsimovak wished to grow vines on his twopenny
estate instead of tobacco. To this, too, I had to give my serious
consideration. It would be a bad precedent, said one, and would seem to
point to the fact that the cultivation of tobacco was going out. This
would be deplorable, for it yields higher profits than the growth of
vines. “Then why does Yanni Tsimovak prefer vines?”--I asked them that,
they did not know. Nor did I know, nor do I care. And who under the sun
is Yanni Tsimovak--he sounds like a patent medicine--and what is his
tobacco to me? Yes, tea, please, and three lumps of sugar.’

‘Not three, Sophy,’ objected the other. ‘You are getting stout, or you
soon will.’

‘Blanche, another word, and I eat the whole contents of the sugar-basin,
lump by lump. And Prince Petros comes this evening!’

‘He won a fortune at Homburg last year,’ remarked Blanche.

‘Fortunate man! Why can’t I go to Homburg, and win a fortune, instead of
including the second book of Euclid in the third standard? Why should he
play roulette, and I wrestle with the Assembly over the affairs of a
patent medicine? I hate medicine.’

‘“Uneasy lies the head----”’ began Blanche.

‘But I don’t wear a crown,’ cried Sophia, upsetting her tea; ‘and if you
bore me with any more of your odious quotations from your absurd
Shakespeare, I shall scream.’

She rang the bell for another cup, as her own was broken. ‘And
to-morrow, what a programme!’ she sighed. ‘There is a review in the
morning. Well, I don’t mind that; but afterwards I have to open the new
town-hall, and go to the mayor’s lunch afterwards, which will last
hours, when I be on the hills. An inconceivable man, Blanche--like a wet
toad; and his wife beggars the imagination. She will wear a velvet dress
like a sofa-cover, and a string of coral, rather short of beads, on
black elastic round her neck. Her face will grow red and shiny during
lunch, she will eat till a proper person would burst, and she will
confide in me afterwards that she, too, is a descendant of princes. She
may be a descendant of the four major prophets for all I care! And
then--oh, I know so well--I shall feel it laid upon me to tell her that
Methuselah is my lineal grandfather, and she will say, “Indeed, your
Royal Highness!” and not see that I am making fun of her. She won’t see
it--she will never see anything as long as she lives; and I shall want
to shake her till her coral necklace bursts and runs all over the floor.
Give me a bun with sugar on the top.’

Now, Prince Petros, who was the second son of the reigning Duke of
Herzegovina, and was expected at Amandos that night, was a young man
altogether unlike the most of those who had tried and failed to touch
the Princess’s heart or win her hand. He came of a strangely mixed race,
which it would be kind to call cosmopolitan, and cruel to call mongrel,
one grandmother being a Jewess, another a Greek, while his mother was
English and of obscure origin. But Princess Sophia, as she had told Mr.
Buckhurst when she tried to induce him to elope with her, had enough
pedigree for two. Furthermore, he had ridden his own horse to the
winning-post in the Austrian Derby, and won a fortune at Homburg, and
was universally allowed to be excellent company. Indeed, the Princess on
the hill of glass could hear the thunderings of the horse-hoofs growing
nearer. The world also knew of him as a very ambitious man, and the
world’s opinion, as so often happens, was entirely true. He was quite
prepared to fall in love with the Princess Sophia, and he was equally
determined to marry her. The husband of the reigning Princess of
Rhodopé, so he thought, had the right to be considered a very enviable
man, and provided he was moderately clever, and as ambitious as himself,
should bid fair to hold the theatre of the world intent on a piece which
it was in his power to produce. The piece should be heroic and
magnificent, and should have all the characters but one left out, but
that one was to play the title-rôle. The name he had not certainly
decided on, but ‘The Emperor of the East’ gave an idea of its scope.
From this it will be seen that Prince Petros, with all his horsemanship,
and ambition and luck at the cards, had also all the makings of an
exceedingly foolish man.

Dinner that night passed off pleasantly enough. Prince Petros sat next
Sophia; the English Minister, Lady Blanche, and Madame Amygdale, a
celebrated French singer of the variety stage, who steered between
propriety and riskiness with a skill worthy the helmsman of a racing
yacht, were the only other guests besides the ladies and gentlemen in
waiting. The Amygdale devoted herself to the entertainment of Prince
Demetrius with such success that he laughed seven times during dinner,
and did not swear once. Prince Petros was an essentially conceited man;
but as his conceit took the subtle form of self-depreciation, it passed
unchallenged for the time. He told them that the man who had ridden
second to him at Vienna was a far better horseman than himself, and that
he was only a beginner at bezique, but was most anxious to learn more of
the game under the tutelage of Princess Sophia.

For a beginner, so it appeared after dinner, he was certainly a very
notable performer. At any period of the game he could have told you
without hesitation or error not only how many kings, aces, queens, and
knaves were still left in, but how many small trumps, an important
factor at the close of the game, as beginners are apt to discover. He
tossed for napoleons, and lost every time; he acquiesced in and welcomed
any raising of the stakes, saying that he was about to propose it
himself. Before the first game was over, Princess Sophia knew she had
met her match--at the cards, at least.

‘You are far better than I,’ she said, with her habitual frankness.
‘With ordinary luck, I could scarcely give you a decently fought game.
Cut, please.’

‘I am a beginner merely,’ murmured the Prince, thereby betraying his
foolishness, for he had said that often enough for mere modesty.

The second game showed his quality still better. Trumps were most
unkindly against him, and about the middle of the game he threw them to
the winds, and escaped the rubicon by a continual scorning of kings and
aces.

‘I could not have got sequence, as it turned out,’ he said
apologetically at the end. ‘You had already shown me three queens, and
the fourth you took in two tricks later.’

‘Tell me how you knew that,’ asked Sophia.

‘It was the only card you could have had any reason for holding up,’ he
said. ‘Any other card you might safely have shown me, but this you held
till the end of the game.’

Princess Sophia beamed at him.

‘I will play with you till it shall be you who says you have had enough.
Oh, I love the cards!’ she cried in a sort of ecstasy, gathering up her
hand.

‘The sun shall first be quenched,’ said Petros.

It was the month of June, and the earliest daylight stealing into the
room about four of the morning saw a quaint sight. In an armchair sat
Princess Sophia’s lady-in-waiting, fast asleep with mouth wide open, and
snoring stertorously, and on a divan near the window lay Prince Petros’s
gentleman-in-waiting, with his face on his hand, sleeping like a tired
child. The candles on the table by which the two played had already once
been replenished, and as the light of morning grew clearer they were
again burned to their sockets. A large silver ash-tray by the Prince’s
side was heaped with a pyramid of ends of cigarettes, two empty siphons
stood on the floor, and two trays with the débris of supper stood on a
side-table. It had been a hot night, and the curtains were undrawn over
the open windows. Every now and then a footman in scarlet livery, with
eyelids, like La Giaconda’s, a little weary, looked in through the open
door and stole away again. Outside, the garden was still dreaming under
its blanket of dew-laden gossamer webs; a hundred feet below slept the
red roofs of the town; and the birds had not yet begun to tune their
voices for the day.

Just before the sun rose, Prince Petros cut to Sophia.

‘Shall I extinguish the candles?’ he asked; ‘it is already light enough
to play without. How delicious the morning air is!’

‘If you will be so kind,’ said Sophia, dealing. ‘For the twenty-first
time you have cut exactly eighteen cards.’

An hour later it was broad day; the birds were awake, and the footman
was asleep. The Prince still looked fresh enough, but his chin (he had
arrived too late to shave before dinner) was dark with his twenty-four
hours’ beard; but Sophia looked as fresh and brilliant as a child
glowing from its morning bath. A little excitement burned in her
beautiful eyes, and her breath came slightly quicker than its wont. But
the risen sun, still cool and invigorating, shone searchingly on the
smooth white skin of her half-turned face as if to find some ravage
wrought by this unnatural night, and confessed its impotence. She was
radiant, an embodiment of the goddess of the morning, and, looking up,
Prince Petros was fairly blinded with her. He hesitated--it was towards
the end of the game--failed to count the remaining tricks, and she put
down in turn the three and the four beziques.

‘Admirable,’ he said; ‘I made a bad mistake. I have paid for it. Yes,
you rubicon me as well. Yet, believe me, I have not played so rotten a
card for years.’

‘You are very modest,’ said she, ‘for you said you were only a beginner.
Yet I like modesty in a man.’

‘I am more fortunate than I deserve,’ said he.

Once or twice during the next game he passed his hand over his chin, and
frowned. At last he could bear it no more, and at the end of the game,
‘If you will excuse me,’ he said, ‘for ten minutes--it shall not be
more, I swear to you--I will get shaved, if my idle scoundrel of a valet
has not gone to bed, then I will return to you. I am no sight for the
morning. But you--you look like morning itself,’ and again he gazed at
her.

She met his eye, then dropped her own, and played with the cards a
moment. Then she rose, and breaking out into a laugh:

‘I am beaten,’ she said, ‘and I retract my words. Oh, Prince, I would
play with you till the crack of Judgment; but if I stop for ten minutes
I shall be asleep. Let us make a bargain; you want to stop for ten
minutes, and for me that is impossible. We will yield to each other, and
thus there is no yielding. Let us both agree to stop.’

‘I have no wish but yours,’ said he. ‘And indeed an hour or two of sleep
would be refreshing. I travelled all yesterday.’

Sophia stretched herself gracefully, like a fawn that is stiff with
lying down. Then she looked round the room, and broke into a little
suppressed bubble of laughter.

‘Look, oh, look!’ she whispered. ‘There is your gentleman and there is
my lady. Let us go quietly, ever so quietly, to our rooms, and what will
be their embarrassment and dismay when they awake! We ride at ten to see
the review. Will you join us? It would interest you, I think. You will
see some fine horses and some fine horsemen.’

‘And you--you will be there?’ he asked.

‘Surely. Now come away on tiptoe.’

The party in the house met again at ten to ride to the review on the
occasion of the Prince Demetrius’s birthday. The gentleman of Prince
Petros and the lady of Princess Sophia seemed strangely ill at ease with
each other, for they had awoke simultaneously; but the two bezique
players, riding one on each side of the Prince, were in the best of
spirits. Never, so it seemed to Sophia, had a night involved so little
waste of time; for, being a sound and lengthy sleeper by nature, each
morning presented her with a dismaying expenditure of eight and a half
blank and unfruitful hours. Never, so thought her father, had she shown
so charming a gaiety, and the cause of it, so he concluded, rode on his
right hand. As for Prince Petros, he saw ambition already nearly ripe
for the attempted plucking; and to do him justice, it was at this moment
Sophia herself, the charm and delicious freshness of her, the wit and
happy gaiety of her, that he coveted, and not her kingdom.

To right and left of them stretched fields of tobacco in full flower,
and vineyards promising a marvellous harvest. By the side of the road
was a grassy ride, and the three cantered gently past the far-famed
plots. To their right, steeply terraced up to prevent a grain of that
soil of gold slipping away in the autumn rains, rose the enclosure of
the Château Vryssi--land as valuable as the streets of the City of
London. On the left, a liberal ten acres of ground, stood the volcanic
patch which nurtured the vines of the Clos Royal grape, brought, so it
was said, by the first Albanian emigrants from the vineyard of Omar.
Further down the hill the vineyards gave place to the culture of
tobacco; and the Prince pointed out in turn to his admiring guest the
birthplace and nursery of the _Eastern Gem_, the _Joy of the Harem_, and
the darker-leaved _Prince Seracour_. The last of these stretched down to
the river-bank, and from there a noble stone bridge rose in a stately
span across the foaming water, and gave them access to the level
parade-ground.

Prince Petros had been prepared to find a large body of fine and
well-drilled men; but schooled as he was to the surprises of the tables,
he could scarce his exclamations of delight as regiment after regiment
wheeled, saluted, and passed. Not a man of the 1st Infantry was under
six feet in height, and not one but would have done credit to the crack
regiment of any nation. With what a crisp ripple the ranks of
firm-footed men, fit, weather-tanned, moving mechanically, yet
individually, swung past! And this array, it must be remembered, was
then but a half of the tale Rhodopé could to-day put into the field; yet
how great a multiple of those who would have appeared on parade ten
years later, had there been a parade at such a time! Like the Queen of
Sheba, Prince Petros had no spirit left in him at the end; he was
enchanted at what he had seen, and with Sophia, intoxicated.

Thereafter followed the opening of the new town-hall, and the luncheon
by the mayor. Prince Demetrius did not propose to attend either of these
functions; and, turning to ride home, he inquired of Prince Petros
whether he would come with him or go to the town-hall and the tedious
lunch with Sophia. The town-hall, he reminded him, was like every other
town-hall, only newer, and the mayor’s luncheon would be similar, only
perhaps a shade more so.

But the ring of his _cri du cœur_--‘Oh, let me go with her!’--pleased
the old man, and he rode home satisfied.

Indeed, of late Sophia’s future had been something of an anxiety to him.
In each individual case, it is true, he had so sympathized with the girl
in her rejection of men who were superlatively eligible, except as
husbands, that he had not had the conviction to ‘preach down her heart’;
nor, he was aware, would his preaching have had the slightest effect.
But he himself, as he guessed, was suffering from an incurable malady,
of which the end, he hoped, would not be far distant; and it would have
pleased him more than anything in the world which had power to please,
to see Sophia married to some suitable husband, who was neither cad nor
nincompoop. Prince Petros did not appear to him to be within measurable
distance of either, and he was gratified to see that the rhadamanthine
attitude which Sophia usually adopted to her wooers was here absent.

The two returned about five in the afternoon, after a reckless scamper
over the rough country. The embarrassed lady and gentleman had been left
far behind, unless, indeed, they had been wise, and returned home
soberly by the road; but neither gave them even a passing thought.
Sophia, with experiment in her mind, had mounted Prince Petros on a
vicious cross-grained brute, and she knew that the horse’s seeming
amenity that afternoon could not be natural to it. Petros had a seat; he
had hands. In Sophia’s eyes there were few gifts of God more ennobling
than these. The last mile up to the stable gates she had challenged him
to race, following an old grass-grown track, intersected with hedges and
fences; and Sophia, to her soul’s delight, had won. She had dismounted
by the time he came up, and sitting on the horse-block, where she had
made her first experiment in cigarettes ten years ago, breathless and
triumphant at having beaten the jockey of the Austrian winner. He
dismounted at the stable gate, and came up to her. A great braid of her
black hair had escaped, and hung gloriously on the shoulder of her
riding jacket; her face was flushed. She was divinely beautiful; and in
a sudden spasm of admiration:

‘Ah, you are enchanting!’ he cried, and the discreet groom led their
horses away.

Sophia no longer doubted that she had found the companion of her life.
The Prince had thundered up the hill of glass, and all the lore of
fairy-tales made him hers. Personally she was attracted by him, by his
slim, straight person, his dark, animated face, the languor of indolence
and movement which cloaked his athleticism, his apt and ready
conversation, and, above all--for she was something of an observer--by a
certain indulgence of expression, habitual to him, which she did not
wholly understand, but which suggested that the pursuits at which he so
excelled were no more than toys to him. Moreover, it is charming to
charm; the charmer usually feels kindly--out of her generosity--to the
enslaved, and his involuntary cry, ‘Ah, you are enchanting!’ was
delicious to her.

After dinner this pretty game of love-making had to yield place to the
sterner and more serious duties of life, and the cards again occupied
their undivided attention. Prince Petros acknowledged to an acquaintance
with the rules of _vingt-et-un_, and all the varieties of that charming
game, which he said he had sometimes played at home with his sisters.
The betting was high, the guests of the evening were amusing, and
disposed to be well amused; the Guards’ band in the gallery of the
ballroom next door was playing delightfully, and Luck was in her most
capricious mood. Later on the Prince gave a dance, and Sophia was only
waiting for the announcement of the arrival of the first guests to leave
the table and perform the much less congenial duty of receiving them.

Eleven struck, and a footman came to tell her that the first carriage
was already coming up to the portico. Sophia was just at the end of her
deal; the Prince was sitting on her right. He had lost once and gained
once at _rouge et noir_. She held the pack ready to give him his third
and last card.

‘For the last, Prince, and then I must go,’ she said. ‘No limit to the
stake, if you wish.’

‘I stake all I possess and am on _noir_,’ said he gravely.

‘You have lost,’ said Sophia, laughing. ‘It is a heart.’

‘Then have I won?’ he said in a low voice, looking at her.

She stood still a moment (the others had heard his stake, though not his
last reply), and a faint flush spread over her face.

‘I was but jesting, and I will not beggar you,’ she said. ‘Now, alas! I
must go. Oh for half an hour more! But, Prince, I think there will be
time for one short game at bezique when the ball is over.’

‘But I was not jesting--I never jest when I am playing cards,’ he said.
‘Yes, let us play one game after the ball.’

The two danced with each other more than once during the evening, but
for the most part Prince Petros was a model of sedulous gallantry to the
official ladies of Rhodopé. The wife of the mayor, a stout, immovable
lady, entirely lost her heart to him. Twice had he waltzed with her, or,
rather, twice had he skipped round and round her, as a child may skip
round a firmly-rooted tree. She, like the tree which is planted in the
whirling earth, seemed to do little more than revolve on her axis once
in twenty-four hours; but she enjoyed dancing, she said, very much, and
it certainly made her very hot. Nor was he wanting here; he poured ices
and exhilarating drinks down her capacious throat, as if to quench some
wild internal conflagration, and the mayoress, so he told Sophia
afterwards, had confided to him that she, too, was of princely line.

With the younger ladies he was no less successful. He was never tired of
dancing, his steering was of so fine an order that it seemed an
exhibition of luck, and the step of each of his partners he gaily
asserted--as, indeed, he had shamelessly declared to the
mayoress--suited his own exactly. He admired everything, and he
flattered everybody, yet so adroitly that his partners only thought that
they themselves were exceptionally enchanting that night. He told a
young, æsthetically-dressed woman, the wife of the Prince’s
aide-de-camp, that she reminded him of Whistler’s symphony in green, a
title which his ready invention had coined on the spur of the moment,
but which earned him a life-long gratitude, for Madame Elsprach had been
secretly afraid that she had rather overdone it. In a word, when the
ball was over, he felt that he had earned his game at bezique, and he
got it.

Next morning he asked an audience of Prince Demetrius, and this was
granted him. Armed with a permission from him, he inquired for Sophia,
for they were soon to ride together. He found her in the garden, dressed
for the ride, and alone.

‘Princess,’ he said, ‘I have come to pay you my stake. Will you accept
it? Sophia, will you accept it?’

‘Yes, Petros,’ she replied.




CHAPTER III.

MARRIAGE-BELLS AND SYSTEMS.


Prince Petros scarcely seemed to have overrated--though it was ever his
habit to take a sufficiently rosy view of the verdict of the world on
himself--the favourable impression he had made in those two days at
Amandos. The officers whom he had met at the review admired his fine
horsemanship no less than his amiability, for no man could be more
agreeable without any suspicion of condescension than he. The ladies of
the Court were entranced by the charm of his manners and the grace of
his dancing. Sophia, as has been seen, was captive to the mastery of his
bezique, and Prince Demetrius, a testimonial to the full as striking as
any of these, had never snarled at him once. The fact of their betrothal
was made known before the lapse of many days, and the news evoked bells,
fireworks and universal approval.

Sophia’s acceptance of him delighted her father, and he would certainly
have made himself odious had she refused him. He had no wish to see his
daughter a second Queen Elizabeth, and the romance of such a figure in
his eyes bore no comparison with the desired consummation of his hopes
to see her a matron with a lusty and numerous progeny. His cousins he
frankly looked upon in the light of obscene birds of prey, ready to
batten on his own extinct line. Already, so it seemed to him, they were
hopping hungrily about the steps of the throne of Rhodopé, but the news
of Sophia’s betrothal scared them hurriedly away, and from afar they
sent long congratulatory telegrams. Prince Demetrius smiled to himself
when he thought how bitter must those honeyed words have been to their
royal authors. The Grand Duke Nicholas, so he thought, alone acted in a
self-respecting manner, for he sent no word.

As for the affianced husband, he was in a stupor of content. Thanks to
his native amiability, to horsemanship nearly as native--for the Princes
of Herzegovina were men almost born in the saddle--and to his carefully
acquired skill at the cards, already the first and most difficult act of
his ‘Empire of the East’ was finished. Had he been, in common with most
gamblers, a victim to superstition, he might almost have been frightened
at the ease of these first steps, and have taken such extreme favours of
fortune with caution. But his own common-sense lulled him to security,
and he played the assiduous suitor to perfection, and, indeed, it was no
part he played.

Princess Sophia alone, and she hardly consciously, was a little afraid
of what she had done. During the days that followed, and especially when
the Prince had departed on a hurried visit home, and she was left alone
with her reflections, the thought that she was so soon to marry him, to
be indissolubly his, came to her with a shock as if of sudden awakening.
Two days’ intercourse, followed by a single word, had changed the whole
course of her life; and though she had always taken it as a matter of
certainty that she would some time marry, yet the imminence of it, the
particulars of it and the ease with which the Fates had woven for her,
hit her like a douche of chilly water. An attractive person, a fine
horseman, a good card-player, these had been her formulated requirements
exhaustively stated, and they were fully satisfied; the measure had been
pressed down, and it ran over. He was all these superlatively, and
though she had never been of the make to indulge in maidens’ fancies, in
daydreams of tenor voices and faultless coiffures, yet she wondered if
there was not something missing. Her rank necessarily limited the number
of eligible suitors; in this she acquiesced fully, for she accepted the
disabilities of being royal, and assuredly none so eligible as Petros
had yet presented himself. But the illimitable choice of suitable
helpmeets granted to the middle classes seemed to her in this month
before her wedding to have something in its favour. Not that she
repented her decision: she would have accepted him again and yet again,
and yet a little inward voice said to her, ‘Is this all?’

The wedding was to be hurried on, and its celebration was fixed for the
first possible day of July. Prince Petros had an ample fortune for
himself, and it was not to be thought of that anyone but her father
should make settlement on the Princess of Rhodopé. All that the old man
wished was that there should be no delay.

‘I have been an unconscionable time living,’ he said one day to his
daughter, ‘and I do not intend to be an unconscionable time dying.
Besides, it is much easier when one is not in very good health to die
than to live, and I have always wished to save myself trouble. So I
propose to die pretty soon. I should like to see a grandson, Sophia, but
that is all I want.’

Sophia started.

‘A grandson!’ she said. ‘That will make me a mother. How very
ridiculous!’

‘Well, if you choose to look at it like that, I hope you will be
ridiculous as soon as possible, and more than once. I think you have got
a good husband; he is not a fool or a cad. That means a great deal.
Nothing really matters besides that.’

‘I do not care for fools and cads,’ remarked Sophia.

‘I knew that, and that is why I was afraid you would not marry at all;
for it is a sad truth that most men are one or the other, and many both.
Your poor dear mother was a fool, Sophia,’ he added, with a touch of
what might be called tenderness.

There was silence for a moment, and then Prince Demetrius went on:

‘Petros will save you a great deal of troublesome detail,’ he said,
‘just as you have of late saved it me. He loves to be popular, and I
think he likes a parade of power. Let him have his fill of it. There is
a great deal of tiresome business in the working of the state of
Rhodopé, about school boards and potatoes--you well know the kind of
thing. He will take all that off your hands, and at the same time win
golden opinions for himself, and enjoy his little triumphs. In fact, it
will add to the absurd veneration--for it is absurd--in which we are
held by the people if you make yourself, when you are on the throne,
rather more scarce than I have done. Let your appearances be something
to be remembered; do not let the people get used to you.’

Sophia looked up.

‘Yes, I never thought of that; that will be a great advantage. Petros
can constantly take my place in the Assembly, and I hope he will enjoy
it more than I have done. He can see to the tobacco and potato bills
during the day, and play cards in the evening. He likes detail--he told
me so. He says it is only by great attention to details that anyone
arrives at great results.’

‘Oh, he said that, did he?’ remarked her father, and then rejected the
idea that had leaped unbidden into his mind, as out of the question. He
little knew how nearly true Prince Petros’s words would prove.

Within a month from their betrothal the wedding was celebrated. Royal
personages flocked from all countries to Rhodopé, and the ports of
Mavromáti and Búlteck were gay with the flags of all nations. The palace
at Amandos, as well as the shooting-boxes on the hills above, were
filled with guests, and the odour of the wedding bake-meats was in the
air. Prince Demetrius was a miracle of courtesy to his visitors, thereby
doing a violence to his normal nature. But he was so uncommonly pleased
at the event, that this subversion of his habits may be forgiven him.
Prince Petros played his part--if indeed such a term can be applied to a
gratification so sincere--to admiration, and the more open-minded of
those whom Prince Demetrius had alluded to as birds of prey confessed
that so amiable a paragon had no more than his deserts.

The entertainment, both of the visitors of the Prince and of the native
populace, endorsed the reputation for hospitality which Rhodopé has
always enjoyed. Down the sides of the square in which stood the
cathedral where the wedding was to be celebrated ran immense tables at
which all comers were feasted. Oxen were roasted whole in the
market-place, and the cellars of the Prince poured out, like the opened
sluices of a river in flood, the garnered sunshine of summers long past.
Magnificent, too, were the presents of the bride and bridegroom. There
were ropes of pearls, some like misty moons, some pink, some black, and
of extraordinary lustre; two diamond tiaras, in the centre of one of
which blazed the famous ‘Blue Wonder,’ a stone from Golconda of
priceless worth; a necklace of opals set in diamonds; a ruby brooch of
unmatched depth of colour, each stone being of the true pigeon’s blood;
eighteen gold shoe-horns, on each of which was the Princess’s monogram
and a crown in diamonds; a bezique-box of chrysoprase, with hinges and
lock of gold (this was from the bridegroom to the bride); four beautiful
bicycles; eight complete Louis Seize tea services, with cups of royal
blue Sèvres; five gold-fitted tea-baskets for four people; and a perfect
grove of gold-handled umbrellas, among which lay gold-mounted
dressing-cases, like boulders in a pine-wood, and enough antique
candlesticks to illuminate the whole kingdom. More curious still was a
roulette-board, of which the marble was a sapphire, and all the numbers
set in precious stones, and (for the folk of Rhodopé knew their beloved
Princess’s tastes, and were anxious to give her presents which would
certainly be useful to her) two thousand packs of picquet cards, a gift
from the Board-school children of Amandos.

The cathedral--that small but exquisite building, built, it is said, on
the designs of Prince Djem--was not sufficient to seat more than the
invited guests of Prince Demetrius and the chief officials of the State;
but outside tiers and tiers of benches had been erected in the streets,
and immense wedge-shaped stands on the flat roofs of the municipal
buildings which line the square. The enthusiasm was prodigious; long
before the head of the procession reached the square, the shouting from
the folk who lined the route from the Palace was like the roar of the
sea, and when the Guards and the first of the royal carriages appeared,
the people rose like one man, and every throat was loud with the Rhodopé
National Anthem. Never had Prince Petros worn a more engaging smile than
when, from his fine black charger, he acknowledged right and left the
thunder of their welcome; never had Sophia looked more graciously
magnificent than when she bowed from the carriage containing her and
Prince Demetrius. The maddening music of the shouts touched her heart,
and the bet that she had made with the Princess Charlotte of Roumania,
that they would not reach the square under an hour from the time they
left the Palace, was, even though she had won, completely effaced from
her mind, and Princess Charlotte never paid.

The two left Amandos the evening after the wedding for their honeymoon,
which they were to spend on Prince Demetrius’s yacht, cruising in the
Mediterranean. The twelve miles of road down to Mavromáti was
illuminated with Oriental gorgeousness, and a continuous torchlight
procession of runners, picturesquely clothed in the national costume,
accompanied them down to the sea. Every half-mile there was a fresh
relay of a hundred, who ran with them their appointed course, and then,
throwing their torches in the air by way of salute, gave way to the
next. The port was one blaze of coloured light, and the yacht
_Felatrune_ a ship from Fairyland. Sophia, warm-hearted and impulsive,
was greatly affected by the enthusiasm of the people; it was for her
they had made the darkness many-coloured; it was the wishes for her
happiness that turned the wonted silence of night into a chorus of
sound. Once during the drive down she had touched Petros on the arm.

‘It is for me they have done this, these dear folk,’ she said.

‘Yes, darling, for us,’ said Petros; and Sophia thought, but without
resentment, that there was just a touch of correction in his voice.

‘Yes, for us,’ she repeated; and her emotion almost made her feel she
loved him, for the inward voice which had queried ‘Is this all?’ was
answered by, ‘Is this not enough?’

The yacht put off as soon as they were on board, and after waiting on
deck--Danae to the golden showers of fireworks--till the shore had faded
to a blur of light, they went below. Supper was prepared for them, and
on another table were candles and the bezique packs, put there by some
thoughtful servant.

Sophia saw them, and her eyes grew bright and dim.

‘How kind they all are!’ she said. ‘They think of everything.’

Prince Petros had also seen.

‘Yes, a game of bezique would be pleasant after supper,’ he said; but
Sophia, womanlike and unreasonable, felt a touch chilled.

In halcyon weather they hastened a south-westerly course, and the second
day saw them gliding, under the cloud-cowled head of Etna, through the
Straits of Messina. They made the straits by three in the afternoon, and
dusk showed them the beacon of Stromboli lit on the starboard bow. It
had been almost tacitly agreed that they were to go straight to Monte
Carlo, or, as Sophia put it, that very pleasant place, somewhere on the
Riviera, where you could play for small stakes without a raid from the
police.

But soon after they had got free of the Straits, it became evident that
the halcyon days were over, for a stiff gale was blowing, and as the
yacht threw the knots over its quarter, the sea, which on leaving the
Straits was choppy, grew frankly rough, and they pitched considerably to
the head sea, even the bowsprit now and then dipping, and raising itself
again with a little whiff of spray. They were sitting on the aft deck,
and Sophia was feeling exhilarated by the leap and shock of the
encountered waves.

‘Oh, Petros!’ she exclaimed, ‘is it not wild and splendid? I love the
sea! And here we are, you and I only.’

She stopped suddenly, for Petros had left her; only a dark figure was
scudding sideways to the companion ladder.

That evening her husband had a little soup in the privacy of his cabin,
for the sea continued boisterous, and Sophia dined alone. It was
exceedingly rough; the fiddles were on the table, and she had to make
swoops and dashes at her food, and peck, as it were, at her glass. But
though she ate with an excellent appetite (for the sea air always made
her hungry), she had a clouded brow. She was sorry for Petros’
indisposition, but she felt not the slightest inclination to sit by his
bedside, read to him, or remind him that his was only a transient agony.
In fact, it was ridiculous that a man should be sea-sick, as ridiculous
as that a man should not be able to ride; and as a matter so superficial
as a man’s seat on a horse had been among the factors which attracted
her to him, so she found that a matter so superficial as this failure of
his internal mechanism to stand a rough sea was a factor on the other
side. The whole affair, however, was so infinitesimal that she soon
dismissed it from a mind that never indulged in that melancholy
diversion self-analysis, and she played several games of Russian
patience by herself, and obtained fresh light on the subject of the
maliciousness of inanimate things.

The yacht arrived at ‘that very pleasant place on the Riviera’ two days
after, and the newly-married pair spent a very interesting fortnight
there. One thing alone troubled Sophia, and that was the discovery that
her husband played on a finely elaborated and seemingly successful
system, involving all sorts of abstruse sums in multiplication. Now,
this to her was a shock, for she was of the type of gambler which, for
want of a better word, we may call the romantic. Primarily she played
for the sake of the play, and it was not the winning of money which she
enjoyed so much as the winning in the abstract. The whole charm of the
thing to her lay in that rolling marble the momentum of which no one
knew, not even the croupier who set it going. She backed her luck,
another unknown agent, against the immutable and incalculable laws of
gravity and friction, and though she had all the gambler’s fine
superstitions, and would back a run of luck, and never lay a sou on No.
13, it was the utter uncertainty of the thing which fascinated her.

She almost felt that Petros ought to have made a clean breast of it
before he married her, classing it among those confessions which many
men may have to make before they take a girl to share their lives, and
she was a little hurt he had not done so. Eventually she decided one day
to talk the matter over with him.

‘Yes; I was surprised, and--shall I say it?--a little disappointed,
dear,’ she said, ‘when I found out that you had a system. Why did you
not tell me? Well, never mind. When a game depends on its uncertainty,
any subtraction from that surely subtracts from its charm. Suppose
anyone invented an infallible system----’

Petros frowned, for he was just multiplying one hundred and
seventy-three by fourteen, and dividing it by seventeen, a calculation
often incidental to the system in question.

‘Mine is infallible,’ he interrupted rather sharply.

‘Yet you lost heavily all the morning, did you not?’

‘I shall win heavily all the evening, you will see;’ and he made a note
of some figures.

‘Oh, Petros, leave the calculation alone a minute,’ she said, ‘and
listen to me. I don’t think of roulette as a means of livelihood.’

Petros laughed.

‘That is just as well, dear Sophia,’ he said, ‘for you would not exactly
have paid your way since you have been here.’

‘Oh, hear me out,’ she replied. ‘It is the excitement I love it for. I
do not think of Monte Carlo as a sort of Stock Exchange, where the acute
make money and the stupid lose it. A system reduces it to just that--a
sort of Stock Exchange without any bulls and bears, whatever they are.’

‘I prefer to win,’ said Petros.

‘Yes; so do I, but I would not promise never to go to the tables if the
croupier gave me an annuity to keep away.’

‘It depends on the size of the annuity.’

‘Ah, then, that is exactly where we differ,’ said she, rising. ‘I should
be no happier for an annuity, nor, indeed, would you, but I am a great
deal happier for a little excitement. It is a lovely afternoon. What a
wonderful colour the sea is! Let us go to the tables.’

Petros won largely that afternoon, and the system justified itself as
far as it is possible for a system to be justified. But the charm of
him considered merely as a gambler, as a man who had made a fortune at
Homburg, had terribly faded in Sophia’s eyes; indeed, to win money at
the tables on a system seemed to her slightly sordid, a kind of trade,
and the money thus won, she imagined, would have a kind of stuffy smell
about it. The feeling she knew was unreasonable, and she did not defend
it; but she never fell into the error of reasoning about a conviction,
and concluding that she was made so and her husband otherwise, she
dismissed the matter as far as possible from her mind.

She herself on the last day that they were there had one of those runs
of luck which occur once in a lifetime. Four times she staked a hundred
napoleons on one number, and twice out of the four times, incredible to
state, won. Then she played on the colour for half an hour, and lost
scarcely once out of ten times, and, to crown all, backed the bank for
the last hour and cleared as much again. Petros was aghast; he himself
would never have backed one number, and to do so four times seemed to
him either imbecile or criminal, and he could not say to himself that
Sophia was imbecile. It materially added to his annoyance to see her win
twice, while the sordid and infallible system was losing on an average
fifty francs an hour--a monotonous and inglorious form of adventure. He
felt warmly on the subject, and as they were rowed across to the yacht
that night addressed a remark to Sophia which keenly resented.

‘I would as soon think of backing one number,’ he said, ‘as of robbing
my father.’

‘And I would as soon think of playing on a system’ returned Sophia, with
spirit, ‘as of sea-sick.’




CHAPTER IV.

THE LAST DAYS OF PRINCE DEMETRIUS.


Prince Demetrius was not destined to see the fulfilment of his remoter
hope, and to take a grandchild on his knee. In the September of this
year, directly after the return of Sophia and her husband, he underwent
an operation for tumour, and in November it was found that there was a
recrudescence of the malady. A portion of the growth was removed by the
forceps and sent for examination to Professor Virchow at Berlin, who
reported unfavourably on it. The growth, it appeared on examination, was
malignant, and the professor feared that there was no doubt that it was
cancerous. He wrote at length to the Prince’s medical adviser, stating
that life might perhaps be prolonged by a second operation, but that the
reappearance of the disease so short a time after the first operation
indicated that the knife could not effect a permanent cure. It was
advisable, so he thought, to acquaint Princess Sophia with the true
state of the case, and let the patient decide whether he would undergo a
second operation or not. To one in his state of health this would be
risky, if not positively dangerous--in fact, the case was exactly one
of those when it was right that the patient should decide.

The Prince’s doctor did as the pathologist suggested, and consulted
Princess Sophia. She was perfectly clear that it was better to tell her
father, and then leave the decision with him. Stricken as she was, for
she had a strong personal affection for her father independent of the
natural tie of relationship, she offered to tell him herself of the
professor’s report, and the doctor gladly accepted her proposal.

It was one of the Prince’s good days on which she went to acquaint him
with his condition, and the exceeding pain which he had suffered for
more than a week was sensibly less. For a great part of this period he
had been kept as far as possible under the dulling influence of morphia;
but he had slept a natural sleep the night before, and had awoke his own
man.

Outside the day was typically autumnal; the great groves of chestnuts,
which stretched down from the lawn to the river, were in the short blaze
of their gaudy liveries, and a coolness ineffably brisk and bracing was
in the air. There had been a slight frost during the night, already the
more brilliant of the leaves were falling, and the sweet odour of
cleanliness came in through the open windows. The Princess, as she
walked slowly from the room where she had breakfasted to her father’s
bedroom, was touched in a way that hitherto had been unknown to her,
with the terrible thoughtlessness of inanimate things. This shedding of
the russet foliage was but a simulated tragedy; next spring the trees
would again be green and luxuriant as if no winter had ever interrupted
their perennial vigour; winter to them was but a time for sleep, a
renovation of their life, while to the puny sons of men no spring
restored the ravages of time past. She looked out over the inimitable
freshness of the land as she waited to know if her father could receive
her, and the sense of contrast between the infinitesimal limits of
humanity and its infinite possibilities caused her eyes to fill with
tears. How momentous and trivial a thing was life!

Yes, he would see her at once; and she entered.

Prince Demetrius was in a humour at which imagination might boggle. He
had enjoyed a good night; his pain was relieved, and he had reverted to
his own diabolical temper.

Sophia stood for a moment in the doorway, hidden from the bed where her
father lay by a screen, her nerves shrinking from that which lay before
her, and steeling herself to go in. A voice from the bed, with an
extraordinary degree of acidity in it, helped her to make the effort
needed.

‘I should have thought _à priori_,’ remarked Prince Demetrius, ‘that a
door must either be shut or open, but you, Sophia, seem to have grasped
the subtlety of touch which is necessary to the leaving of it neither
one nor the other. Please decide which you intend to do, and for God’s
sake do it.’

She drew a long breath, shut the door, and came to the bedside.

‘Good-morning, father,’ she said. ‘They told me you had a very good
night. I am so glad;’ and she kissed him on the forehead.

‘The worst of a good night,’ remarked her father, ‘is that you do not
know it is good until it is over. The pleasure of it is as unreal as the
pain of a regret. Personally I never regret anything. Fools regret, and
even a knave can repent.’

Sophia stood there silent; the burden of what she had to say took from
her the power of initiating trivialities; but her father went on,
rasping like a file.

‘When a thing is done, it is done, and things for the most part do not
produce any consequences at all, though people who have addled their
brains with trivial thinking tell us that they do. Moralists and
philosophers are the most shallow people in the world, for argument is
ever less sound than conviction. This morning, Sophia, you look as if
you were inclined to argue. Please don’t do that, or, if you must
argue--I know it may happen to any of us--please go and argue in the
passage, where I can’t hear you.’

Sophia sat down by the bedside.

‘I am not come to argue,’ she said; ‘but, father, I am come to talk. I
am come to tell you something.’

‘Tell it, then,’ said Demetrius, with the composure of a tree.

‘It is this: I have a report from Berlin, and a question to ask you----
’ and she stopped.

‘The message first, the question afterwards,’ said Prince Demetrius, and
his composure seemed quite unshaken.

‘Professor Virchow has sent a most unfavourable report; your malady is
malignant----’ and she stopped again.

‘Why the devil not say cancer, and have done with it?’ asked that man of
iron.

‘You are right. And the question I have to ask you is whether you will
have another operation or not. They say it is for you to decide. It will
be dangerous, but it will, if successful, prolong your life a little.’

Prince Demetrius turned slightly in bed to look at Sophia, for her voice
was unsteady.

‘Then it is the silliest question I ever heard,’ he said. ‘Of course I
shall have nothing of the sort done. Blow your nose, Sophia, and don’t
cry. If you allude to the subject again, I shall send you out of the
room. Tell the doctors this only, that if ever they ask me anything so
absurd again, I shall dispense with their services. The matter is
closed. And now, if you have nothing to do, we will play _écarté_,
please. Napoleon points, and a hundred francs on the game. Do you
remember playing with me for the first time when you were a little girl?
You played well even then; now you are nearly as good as I am.’

From that day the Prince grew rapidly worse, and he suffered much. For
many hours in the day he was under morphia, but a small interval only
would elapse between the passing off of the of the narcotic and the
return of pain. But in these intervals he was powerfully lucid and
incisive.

‘It is this,’ he said once--‘this mockery of life which the medical
fools thought I might wish to be prolonged. A man must have a singularly
low opinion of consciousness if he thinks this is worth having. It is a
bore, an awful bore, Sophia, and reminds me of waiting at a station for
one’s train, which is the most inglorious way I know of passing the
time.’

‘Would you care that I should read you the news?’ Sophia would ask
sometimes.

‘Certainly not,’ he answered. ‘At last I feel irresponsible. Nobody can
do anything which concerns me, except to leave the door open when I
prefer it shut. Really, if one has to be somewhere, to be on a death-bed
is one of the very best places. Nothing can touch one; it is like
getting out of a tunnel full of jarring noises.’

He raised himself in bed a little.

‘I wish I had been your child, Sophia,’ he said, ‘and that is really all
I want. I have lived quite long enough on my own account. There, don’t
cry. I shall have another half-hour, I suppose, before the disgusting
pain returns, so let us play picquet. We shall have time for one
_partie_, and then I shall send you away.’

But death was merciful, and came quicker than the doctors had
anticipated, and on the first of January the Princess Sophia was
proclaimed hereditary monarch of the realm of Rhodopé.




CHAPTER V.

ENTER THE CENTIPEDE.


One morning in the July of the next year Sophia and Petros were sitting
at their half-past-twelve breakfast in the broad north veranda of the
palace at Amandos. A big Persian rug was spread under the table, but
otherwise the black-and-white marble floor was uncarpeted for coolness.
To the west the awnings were down, but the whole long of the gallery
towards the north was open to the breeze which pleasantly tempered the
extreme warmth of the day. Over the town hung a blue haze of trembling
heat, but the air was dry and invigorating, and though the thermometer
registered a hundred degrees, not oppressive.

Coffee had just been served, and as the servants withdrew Sophia lit a
cigarette.

‘About August, Petros,’ she said. ‘I want very much to go away the first
week at latest, and I really see no reason why I should not.’

‘The House will not rise till September,’ said he.

‘Oh, the House, the House!’ cried she. ‘What does it matter what the
House does? Let it fall down if it chooses! I have signed my name so
often during the last month that if I go on I shall get writer’s cramp.
What is writer’s cramp, by the way? And what do all my signatures amount
to? Somebody has a concession for vine-growing, somebody is put in
prison for a year, a firm is given leave to supply smokeless powder
instead of Eley’s. I am sick of it all! I should like to turn Rhodopé
into a limited company, and have it run by Durand, or Spiers and Pond,
and pay one of their barmaids so much a year to impersonate me. I want
to go away for a month or two as soon as possible, and what is more,
Petros, I am going.’

‘If you have settled that, why argue about the matter,’ said he, ‘or
trouble to consult me?’

‘Well, I wanted to know your opinion as to whether it is really
advisable for me to stop. At the same time, if I had thought you would
really disagree with me, I should not have asked you. But the thing is
done now. What do you think about it?’

Petros was silent a moment. He had a plan in his head, and he wished to
play his cards to advantage.

‘Well, here is my opinion,’ he said at length, ‘You have asked for it,
and you shall have it, though, as a rule, you don’t like being advised,
and I don’t care about advising. You are reigning Princess of this
country, and that delightful position----’

Sophia laughed.

‘I would sooner be a milkmaid,’ she said, ‘but such a thing is not
possible.’

‘And that delightful position,’ continued Petros, with the irritating
manner of a man unaware of an interruption, ‘has certain
responsibilities attached to it. You cannot get rid of them except by
sheer gross neglect of your duties, but to tell you the truth, they are
not very onerous. One of them is that you should preserve the form, at
any rate, of attending to the business of the House. I do not think you
need really fear writer’s cramp from signing their resolutions, whatever
writer’s cramp may be; I suppose it is the result of writing. But you
must perform your simple duties----’

‘I have seen that in copper-plate hand in the copy-books I used to do
when I was a child,’ remarked Sophia.

‘That is where I got it from. It seems to me very true, though a little
stale. I do not interfere with you, as you very well know, and I am, of
course, powerless to prevent you going away when you wish. But I think
you will make a very great mistake if you go away now.’

‘_Tant pis_,’ said she. ‘Let us start on the last day of this month. And
oh, Petros, there is a little place on the Riviera----’

Petros rose and walked about in seeming agitation for a moment or two.
He was managing his cards beautifully. Then he turned sharply to her.

‘Go, then, Sophia,’ he said; ‘but I shall not come with you.’

Sophia stared.

‘Why not?’ she asked. ‘I promise never to refer to your system. And the
sea is usually calm at this time of year.’

‘That is not the reason.’

‘What is it, then?’ she asked.

‘Because the mischief which your absence during a sitting of the House
will entail will be sensibly lessened--I do not wish to overrate my
position--if I remain here, and have the air of attending very
sedulously to the affairs of the State. There are certain businesses of
the kind which you have allowed me to transact for you before--the less
important Bills, in fact; with your permission, I will attend to them
again. We want a fresh strain of blood in the trooper’s horses, for
instance; at any rate, I can go carefully into the expenses and business
incidental to that. I know a little about horse-breeding; I may even be
useful on that question. The Bill will come before the House in the
second week in August. I can, at least, serve on a committee. Later,
when the House rises, I will join you. How does my plan strike you?’

Sophia was touched.

‘It is good of you to suggest that, Petros,’ she said. ‘It would be
absurd for me to refuse your offer. You will not be very dull here? No?
And it won’t look odd, will it, if I go and you stop here? I have a
horror of doing things that look odd.’

‘Not so odd, at any rate, as if we both went away,’ said Petros.

‘And much less odd than if I stopped here all August,’ remarked Sophia
in self-defence. ‘It would be an imbecility.’

Sophia got up from the table, and went indoors to the nursery to see the
adorable Leonard, the four-months-old baby. Petros’s arrangement seemed
to her to be in every way admirable. Apart from the convenience of
getting away when she wanted, it gave her the opportunity of getting
away alone. She was fond of her husband, but constantly irritated by
him. She had no idea of letting herself be schooled by him into
dependence, to be taught the duty of royalty by him, and she never
forgot that she was Princess of Rhodopé, and he her husband. More than
once had he attempted to point out to her his idea of what a wife’s
attitude should be to her husband, and what a monarch’s attitude towards
the people, and her retort had been not far to seek. She was autocrat of
Rhodopé, and she was not going to be taught by anybody.

Petros, she found, was not only master of the subtleties of bezique, he
knew also the most refined secrets of irritating conversation. With all
his varied gifts, he had the misfortune to be a pedant, a schoolmaster
in private life, and, what is worse, to be quite unconscious of his
pedantry. Sophia resented with every fibre in her nature his attempts to
instruct her, to develop her mind, and, indeed, the chief result of his
schooling had been to develop her impatience of him. Living with him was
like living in a stuffy room with only high-backed chairs. He was for
ever wanting her to sit up straight, and listen to improving
conversation, whereas she wanted to lounge imperially by an open window.
Something of the blood of generations of irresponsible rulers ran in her
veins; the unbridled license of Eastern tyrants had mingled with the
refinement of the student line of Florence to compound a subtle
temperament. He had once alluded to some wise act of the Czar, wishing
her to draw a lesson from it, but in a moment her nose was in the air.

‘The Romanoffs were feeding pigs when we were kings,’ she had said.

Her education, so to speak, had been the work of generations of
ancestors, accomplished prenatally, and she owed more to them than to
her tutors. It was Tamburlaine who had smoked a cigarette on the
horse-block, and Lorenzo, more than her masters, who had given her that
quick artistic perception that made the great singers of Europe love to
sing to her accompaniment. The blood of the great Catherine was hers,
too, and hers by inheritance the intolerance of rulers. ‘_C’est mon
plaisir_’ was reason enough with her. Indeed, she needed a clever
husband and a loyal people. The former she had got in a way, but his
cleverness was more akin to cunning than to wisdom or broadness of
vision. To trace the process of thought was to him as valuable as the
conception itself, and it pleased him more to make an infinitesimal
deduction correctly than to blunder splendidly. She was headstrong, and
would never be small; he was a master of finesse, but could never be
big. She was royal to her finger-tips, he was only the cadet of a family
that happened to be reigning. Her second need--a large loyalty from her
people--was more completely hers than he guessed. What she did was
right, and how firmly the people of Rhodopé held that creed he was to
learn. The spirit preached from Potsdam had possession of their hearts.

Petros sat still on the veranda after she had left him, and smoked
contentedly. If Sophia found him irritating, he at any rate bore the
knowledge with equanimity. He had not looked for domestic bliss in his
marriage; for he did not aim at domesticity, and he did not believe in
bliss. But every day found him more thankful that he had married her,
for he believed in ambition, especially when it was his own. Rhodopé
seemed to him more enviable than ever, and he fully intended to make a
bid for it. Rhodopé, he said to himself with sublime self-sufficiency as
he was shaving, wanted a master; and he looked at his image in the
glass. The very fact that Sophia had chosen to marry him amounted to a
guarantee of his excellent qualities in the minds of her subjects; and
he was quick enough to see how popular he was, and complacently shallow
enough not to guess at the grand reason for his popularity. He was
eminently possessed of the power to please, and when he found himself
pleasing he not unnaturally referred it to his own power.

A further cause for gratification this morning lay in the fact that
Sophia had been so willing to leave to deal with the affairs of the
kingdom alone. She had closed with his offer as soon as it had been
made, and, as this was the first real step that he had taken since his
marriage in the prosecution of his aims, he was pleased that it should
have gone forward without a stumble. He intended to use her absence to
take several more steps in the same direction.

The Assembly of Rhodopé is peculiarly constituted. In all it numbers
sixty members, of whom two-thirds enjoy hereditary seats, and one-third
are elected by vote every three years. But there was in those days no
sharp division into parties; no socialism as yet masqueraded in the
streets under the very penetrable disguise of philanthropy; and those
who had only small estates of their own had not yet begun to initiate
Bills whereby larger holders should be deprived of their lands. On the
other hand, even the hereditary voters were not all of blindly
Conservative disposition, and the general tendency of politics was to be
mildly progressive. The Prime Minister, elected by the House, was the
President, and represented the monarch in his absence; but when the
hereditary Prince or Princess was present, he took his seat in the body
of the House. The Crown, however, possessed the power of deposing the
Prime Minister and appointing a one at discretion. This prerogative had
not since the great political crisis of 1793, and generally considered
obsolete. But it had never been repealed, and nothing stood in the way
of its being exercised should the Sovereign decide to do so.

Princess Sophia left on the first of August in the royal yacht
_Felatrune_. Her departure had been made somewhat hurriedly, and she had
given but scanty attention to the discussion of the management of the
affairs of State in her absence. Prince Petros, however, insisted that
he should be given some clear notion of how far he was to be considered
Regent, and how far he was to telegraph for her instructions. He had
made a copy on a sheet of foolscap of the Bills which would come before
the House before it broke up in September, and she ran her eye quickly
over them.

‘Tobacco, potatoes--potatoes, tobacco,’ she said; ‘there is nothing
there that I cannot leave completely to you. I will write a short
address to the House, if I have time, in which I nominate you as my
Regent, and Malakopf will read it out to them. Here, I will do it now;
give me a bit of paper.’

Sophia scribbled some half-dozen lines, signed them, and addressed the
envelope to the Prime Minister, Malakopf.

‘I understand that I am to take your place in every way,’ said Petros,
to whom she had not shown the note.

‘Yes, I have said that,’ said Sophia. ‘Don’t introduce a Bill for
deposing me, you know; and if there is any unexpected crisis, let me
know by telegraph. Of course there won’t be, for crises never happen in
Rhodopé, and the unexpected never happens anywhere. I have complete
confidence in you, Petros. And don’t be terribly conscientious; if
possible, let me not hear a word of these three-halfpenny concerns till
you join me. I want an entire holiday.’

‘A holiday will do you good, dear Sophia,’ said he; ‘I am afraid the
heat has tired you. In turn, let me ask you not to make the State
bankrupt at Monte Carlo.’

‘It wants a man with a system to do that,’ laughed Sophia.

Petros and Leonard, an amazingly sunny infant, went down to Mavromáti to
see the Princess off, and returned together to Amandos about six
o’clock. Petros did not care for children, and the unconscious Leonard
merely roused in him a sense of futile envy at the thought that the boy
would some day be Prince of Rhodopé, not merely the husband of its
Princess. The Assembly met at three o’clock next day, and he spent a
solitary but arduous evening going over very carefully a scheme he had
in his mind. He was naturally a cautious man--a man with a system, as
Sophia had said, but occasionally he would embark in a risky concern.
His investments of all kinds, whether of money or brains, were either
very safe or paid an enormous percentage.

The Prime Minister at this time was a man named Malakopf, originally no
doubt of Russian birth, whose family had been settled in Rhodopé for
many generations. Russian he might or might not be; Jew he certainly
was, and he had all the financial sagacity of that remarkable race. His
probity, however, stood in great need of demonstration; and he was known
to have been mixed up in a very lucrative but more than questionable
transaction, some ten years before, on the Vienna Bourse. There had been
a most unpleasant scene on this occasion between him and Prince
Demetrius, who spoke his mind with singular frankness, and Malakopf’s
affection for the reigning House of Rhodopé was supposed to be of the
most tepid temperature.

Sophia detested the man; with her habitual force of expression, she had
said that to be in the room with him was like having tea with a
centipede: one never knew where it would be next, and the prevalent
impression was that it was crawling up one’s back. But Petros from the
first had made much of him; he had often told his wife that so acute a
financier was a goose who laid golden eggs for the State. It would be of
the nature of suicide to strangle anything so intimately connected with
the well-being of the principality. He might be like a centipede,
socially speaking, if she would have it so; politically he was
invaluable. Besides, he was a man with power; he could be a dangerous
enemy, and it was always well to make friends with people who might be
dangerous enemies.

Sophia’s nose had gone in the air at this.

‘My family is not accustomed to make friends with centipedes,’ she had
said. ‘But, of course, you can do as you please, Petros.’

To-day Prince Petros sought him in his private room off one of the
lobbies of the House. He was a bent, withered little man, but nimble in
movement, and there was a shifty brightness in his eye. He got up at the
Prince’s entry, and bowed low to him.

‘An unexpected pleasure, your Highness,’ he said. ‘Indeed, I was told
that Princess Sophia left Mavromáti yesterday, and I had supposed you
had not yet returned. I am shamefully ill-posted in the news of our
Court, but I have some transactions of great moment on hand, which must
be my excuse.’

Now Malakopf knew that Petros had returned to Rhodopé, and Petros knew
that he knew it. Thus comment was needless.

‘My wife left yesterday,’ said he, ‘but, as you see, I am already back
again. The Princess was in need of a holiday. State affairs’--he spoke
with slow emphasis, and looked Malakopf full in the face--‘State affairs
have tired her terribly this summer. She has been head over ears in
work.’

No shadow of a smile came over the Prime Minister’s face.

‘Indeed, it must be so,’ he answered. ‘Never a moment’s relaxation or
amusement! An iron will!’

But Prince Petros was satisfied; he was sure Malakopf had completely
understood him.

‘I came to talk to you on an important matter,’ said the Prince, taking
a seat. ‘Naturally, my wife and I could not both be absent during the
sitting of the House, and she gave me to understand that she was
sending you a document, which she wished to be communicated to the
Assembly, conferring on me--so I took her meaning to be--powers which
amount--which really amount--to a Regency during her absence.’

Malakopf, though he was not naturally slow, appeared to take some
moments before he grasped what the Prince had said. He fixed his eye on
the window so long, without stirring a muscle, that the Prince spoke
again.

‘No doubt you have seen the document,’ he said, with a little
nervousness. ‘From the few words the Princess let fall to me on the
subject, I gathered--wrongly perhaps--that such was the purport of it.’
At last the Prime Minister turned briskly in his chair.

‘That, I think, we may consider to be the purport of it,’ he said. ‘And
I don’t suppose that the Princess Sophia has ever taken a more prudent
and far-sighted determination. Indeed, it might be even more far-sighted
than she supposes.’

The Prince knew that he was, so to speak, skating on ice which might
prove to be thin. Malakopf knew it equally well, and he applauded
inwardly and derisively the other’s caution.

‘You flatter me,’ said the Prince; and Malakopf silently but sincerely
agreed with him. But he let no palpable pause precede his answer.

‘Flattery,’ he said, ‘is the unwilling tribute of a wise man to his
inferior, or a fool to his superior. Dear Prince, how can I flatter you?
For you are our beloved Princess’s husband, and indeed I have
glimmerings of sense. But let us approach the point with more
particularity. We must consider--must we not?--what will be your proper
place in the Assembly. You represent the Princess Sophia, and as her
representative you take the chair whenever you are present. But here the
legal point comes in: you have no seat--an anomaly as I have always
felt--in the Assembly at all. How would it be, then, if you absented
yourself to-day, and that I, after reading the Princess’s message,
proposed a resolution that during her absence you should be, _ex
officio_, a Member of the House? Then you would have a seat there, and
your position after that, as her representative, would make you
President.’ He paused a moment, and with a look amazingly frank, ‘We
understand each other, do we not?’ he almost whispered, and he
approached as near to a chuckle as his prudence allowed.

‘You are admirably lucid,’ said Petros, returning his gaze.

‘And you, too,’ thought Malakopf; but he did not say so, and ceased
chuckling.

‘Let us, then, act thus,’ he continued: ‘this afternoon I will take the
vote of the House on the matter. It is almost unnecessary for me to send
you the report, for there can be only one conclusion. However, by six
o’clock I will let you know what has happened, for the matter of form
merely--an official communication, my dear Prince, an official
communication. Things must be done in order.’

Prince Petros rose.

‘Pray let me ask you,’ he said, ‘to throw over your other engagements
to-night, and dine with me alone. You shall tell me then how the House
received the proposal.’

‘I am infinitely honoured,’ said Malakopf, bowing again; and the Prince
took his departure.

Left alone, Malakopf lit a cigarette, but instead of attending to
business, seemed lost in evil meditation. At length he drew some papers
towards him, and gave one ghost of a laugh.

‘There is a depth of shallowness,’ he said, to himself, ‘about that man,
which to my frail mind is unplumbable.’

Malakopf dined with the Prince that evening, and before they went in to
dinner made the most favourable report on the way that his proposition
had been received in the House.

‘I first read out the Princess Sophia’s communication,’ he said. ‘It was
known that Her Royal Highness had left for Monte----had left for a few
visits to her relations, and the House requested me to record to you
their sympathy with the Princess’s reason for taking a holiday, and
hoped that a few weeks’ relaxation would recuperate her.’

‘I will convey the sympathy of the House to her,’ murmured Prince
Petros.

Malakopf bowed.

‘I next brought forward the proposal that you should be entitled to a
seat in the House in the Princess’s absence. It was carried, of course,
unanimously--I may say with acclamation. Indeed, I have never,’ said
he, drawing his hand over his chin--‘I have never seen so great an
enthusiasm in our House.’

‘I will do my best to merit the honour you have conferred on me,’ said
the Prince, checking his exultation.

The two dined alone, but with great state and magnificence. Both men
wore their orders; on the sideboard was displayed the gold plate
belonging to the Sovereign, and during dinner the royal band played a
selection of ravishing airs from the gallery. The Prime Minister, Petros
knew, liked magnificence, but what he did not know was that on this
occasion he saw through it. Malakopf was something of a _gourmand_ and
much of a _gourmet_. He ate somewhat largely and very intelligently. The
turtle soup was excellent, the _chaudfroid_ of quails a marvel of art
(he would have liked to congratulate the chef), and he nearly wept with
joy over the haunch of roe-deer braised _à la Savarin_. Finally the
bottle of Château Vryssi (1832) which he drank with his dessert was
almost an awe to him. He was near to feeling a sense of unworthiness,
but so far overcame it as to be able to drink a second bottle.

Petros knew well the Prime Minister’s weakness for fine food, and
thought that if a good dinner would not earn the man’s gratitude, and so
indirectly his help, nothing would. In this he was right. Had it been
possible for Malakopf to feel himself under an obligation to anybody, he
would have been disposed to fall in with the wishes of a man who had
fed him well. But the ore of his nature, if milled, would have been
found to contain not the smallest assay of gratitude. Not only had
Nature not compounded him with a grain of it, but in the mixing she had
used a clean spoon, one which had never had gratitude measured in it; he
was wholly incapable of such a feeling. All he knew was that he would
certainly dine with the Prince as often as he was invited--even
indicate, ever so lightly, that he was ready to come again.

Dinner over, the two sat in the south veranda, where they drank coffee
and smoked. Malakopf, habitually cautious, was perhaps moved to an
unwonted boldness by that noble grape of which he had drunk so freely;
but after he had unloosed his tongue to speak the first words on the
subject which was in the minds of both of them, he knew he had done
right, and that the Prince would be a tool in his hands.

‘It is a thousand pities,’ he said, ‘that the Princess is so delicate.
With all my loyalty, all my unwavering devotion to our royal line, of
which I need not remind you, I have sometimes nearly caught myself
wishing that Prince Demetrius had had a son, a man of iron like himself,
who was equal to the strain and stress of State affairs. The
Princess--God bless her!--has often reminded me of that fable of the
sword which was worn out by use--she will not abide in the scabbard.
Indeed, how you persuaded her to take this little holiday, my dear
Prince Petros, I cannot conceive--a miracle of successful diplomacy.’

‘We must encourage her to be put in the scabbard sometimes,’ said the
Prince; ‘and, indeed, she felt herself tired out; it required but little
persuasion on my part to make her go. Her weakness, not my strength, was
the giver of my little victory.’

Malakopf shook his head.

‘You underrate your powers, Prince Petros,’ he said. ‘It was always the
same with the Princess; she is all zeal for whatever she has in hand. I
have even seen her once or twice here in the palace playing some trivial
game at the cards with the ardour--all the ardour, so I thought--with
which she follows our debates. And with what act! You would have thought
she really cared for the romances of the little pasteboard pieces in
which her guests of less sterling fibre found their amusement. She plays
still, I believe?’

Prince Petros had not the patience to continue this elaborate farce.
Malakopf had fully intended that the first step of importance should be
taken by the other, and the wraith of a smile hovered round his mouth as
Petros spoke again.

‘She plays still, as you say,’ he replied; ‘and, as you know, she has
gone to Monte Carlo, and her royal relations are the tables. The affairs
of the State, as you also know, are nothing to her. I fully believe,
though, that if she had stopped here she would have suffered in health
through pure boredom. But that which is so insignificant to her is very
dear to me. I want to see Rhodopé a great power, and no buffer State. I
want----’

He stopped abruptly, got out of his seat, and began walking up and down.

‘Your Highness wants----?’ suggested Malakopf, insinuatingly, and as
softly as a thought.

‘I want Rhodopé to be a nation,’ broke out the Prince. ‘Look at our
material!’ (‘Already he says “our,”’ thought Malakopf.) ‘Did you ever
see finer men than these troops? Look at our coast, and show me the
fleet that could effect a landing. Have you seen Gibraltar? You have
seen Búlteck, and that is two Gibraltars! Look at our boundaries! Whose
is the army that could invade Rhodopé? England herself is not more
definitely marked out by Nature to be a great power than we. We are of
one race with the Albanian, the flower of the Greek as well as the
Turkish troops--completely careless of death, and with no thought but
their country. Once set me in a great position here, and you shall see
what I will make of Rhodopé’. If I were the humblest Member of the
Chamber I could act, but now I am bound with chains of lead. My hands
are tied; I can do nothing; and my wife spends her money and her time
and her thoughts at Monte Carlo. I am no more than the lacquey who
stands in her ante-chamber--less even, for he is useful in his way; I
alone am a cipher. Oh, Malakopf, it is pitiable, man--it is pitiable!’

The Prince stood before him, his hands opened out by his side, his
handsome mobile face suffused with excitement. Malakopf put one leg
over the other, and suppressed a sigh of content. He had not dared to
hope for speaking so plain as this. There was no need for any more
diplomatic dancing.

‘Yet you have obtained one step to-day,’ he said; ‘you have a seat in
the House. That may well be considered--how do you say it?--the thin end
of the wedge.’

‘Yes, and when my wife returns out comes the wedge,’ replied the Prince.
‘And out come I. Oh, Lord!’

‘Not necessarily,’ said the Prime Minister.

The Prince sat down.

‘Explain yourself; I do not understand,’ he said. Malakopf flicked the
ash off his cigar. He was so completely master of the situation, that he
did not intend to be hurried.

‘It is true that your seat is only temporary at present,’ he said; ‘but
one way and another, dear Prince Petros, I have managed to become a
somewhat influential person in the State----’

‘So I always tell my wife,’ said the Prince with extraordinary unwisdom,
thinking to please the centipede.

‘I am infinitely grateful for your good word,’ replied the other. ‘But I
did not mean that I had any influence in the eyes of the Princess--and,
to speak to you with a frankness that will nearly equal your own, I do
not care to have. But with my considerable wealth, and the extent of my
estate, not to mention a certain personal influence I have with a large
party in the Assembly--an influence which it would be false modesty in
me to underrate, I could, I think, manage to secure you a permanent
seat.’

‘Take another cigar,’ said the Prince. ‘Will you do this for me?’

Malakopf smiled. The juxtaposition of the offer of a cigar and this
request suggested, fantastically enough, a bribe.

‘I do not say it would be easy to manage,’ he replied. ‘It might be a
troublesome affair, and, to speak plainly’--here he laid his hand on the
Prince’s knee, and looked him suddenly in the face--‘what am I to get by
it?’

‘Yet you said this afternoon that my not having a seat in the Senate was
an anomaly.’

‘I endorse what I said. But is it expedient for me personally to attempt
to do away with that anomaly?’

‘I will make it worth your while,’ said the Prince in a low voice.

‘That is enough, my dear Prince,’ he said.

‘Here is a light for you,’ said Prince Petros; and his hand shook as he
held the match in the windless air.




CHAPTER VI.

THE NEW MEMBER.


When Malakopf went home that night, he came near to being a victim of
exultation. That delightful emotion he always eschewed, for he
considered it a dangerous feeling, one that blunts the perception,
deadens acumen, and has no practical significance. Indeed, the greatest
extravagance in this way that he usually allowed himself on the
conclusion of some very successful bargain was a pleased contempt at the
contemplation of wits inferior to his own, and a disdainful
indifference, amounting sometimes to dislike, to those who had been his
tools or his unfortunate adversaries. But to-night he was strangely
moved; perhaps he was even a little dazzled at the greatness of the
stake for which he was playing, perhaps he was only much pleased and
surprised at the aptness of the tool which Providence--he made no doubt
it was Providence, which always looks after those who look after
themselves--had so kindly put in his hand. Like the Prince himself, he
too was writing a private little drama of much the same nature, the
chief difference being that while the Prince’s play was entitled ‘The
Emperor of the East,’ Malakopf’s was more modestly called ‘The President
of the Republic.’ Another variation between the two is perhaps worth
recording: in the Prince’s production there was a minor character, a
sort of gentleman-in-waiting, called Malakopf (Count Malakopf, perhaps),
whereas in his ‘President of the Republic’ no mention was made of any
Petros, Prince or otherwise.

But as a tool Petros seemed admirable; he was sharp, and could be thrown
away when done with. His relation to the Princess would put him, in the
minds of all loyal people--and Malakopf valued loyalty in others--beyond
the reach of suspicion. For what could be more suitable, or more
gratifying to the folk of Rhodopé, than to see the husband of their
beloved Princess, that accomplished rider, that finished squire of
dames, so identifying himself with the affairs of the kingdom?
Furthermore, there was a vast deal of underground work which would
probably have to be done, and if there was one thing more than another
in which the busy brain of Malakopf delighted, it was to make himself a
mole, a delver in the dark, and spring his castles on the foolish
grazing cattle where they were least suspected. The Château Vryssi
(1832) was sweet, though dryer, than the vintage of his thoughts.

Prince Petros was, in a way, wise to trust the plan and execution of his
conspiracy--for so we may already call it--to Malakopf. He himself, at
any rate, had neither the courage, the caution, nor the constructive
ability which could warrant any decent chance of success. He was
cunning, no more, and cunning is but a pin-point to go a-fighting with.
On the other hand, he was irredeemably foolish to trust Malakopf further
than he could see him, and he could not see far. Thus, he was like to
fall between two stools, an inexcusable and an undignified position,
which ends on the floor.

As for Malakopf, that astute politician had as usual several strings to
his bow. His scheme, as he had planned it, could scarcely fail
altogether of success. The target at which he aimed was a long and
hazardous shot, being, indeed, no less than the overthrow of the
dynasty, the establishment of a republic in Rhodopé, and the
establishment of himself as President of the same. He had, as he had
told Prince Petros, a considerable influence in the State. For some
years past, under different names, he had invested immense sums in
Government stock, and if at any moment he chose to throw his shares on
the market, he could not only discredit the National Bank in the eyes of
Europe, but he would also seriously cripple the State itself. Again,
under an alias, he had driven a flourishing money-lending trade in
Amandos, and many of the Members of the Assembly were seriously in his
debt. Thirdly, his vast estates in the country gave employment to a
large body of the electorate, and he could, so he supposed, command when
necessary a great number of votes.

But it was characteristic of the man that he was preparing at first to
use a slower and more devilish method of magnifying himself to the
detriment of the reigning family. He had on the tip of his poisonous
tongue all the clap-trap of socialism, and he had, what is almost as
important, a real acquaintance with the spirit of their demands. The
scheme proposed by the absurd catchword of ‘three acres and a cow’
contained its residuum of truth, and if so enticing a phrase was not
sufficient, he could justify it to willing ears. Princess Sophia was, as
he knew, an unrivalled Aunt Sally for such random weapons; her
extravagance, her Parisian toilettes, her magnificent jewels, her nights
spent in ruinous card-playing, were all texts ready for the ranter. He
did not intend to do the ranting himself, that should be for those whom
he controlled; he, the Prime Minister, with quivering lip, but firm of
purpose, would sit in his exalted place on the Assembly and find himself
unable to answer such damnation of criticism. The Budget was the
instrument on which he greatly relied. A little judicious arrangement,
the money spent in outdoor relief prominently contrasted with the civil
list of the Princess, could not fail to tell.

These were the methods by which he had long planned to make an attack on
the reigning house, and they still seemed to him trustworthy. But he
realized that this new ally, in the shape of the Prince, might open to
him other and directer roads. In any case, it was a sound policy to put
this man of straw in the place which the Princess Sophia, who was
undeniably flesh and blood, occupied in the Assembly. If once he could
be completely installed there, it was comparatively easy to turn him
out, leaving, so he hoped, a vacancy in the President’s chair. But such
a delectable conclusion, he realized, must be largely a matter of luck.
He was merely prepared to take a chance, if it came in his way.

But the man, with all his burning audacity, was yet cautious.
Personally, supposing no great stroke of luck occurred and he had to
follow his slower methods, he gave the dynasty four years; by that time
his unholy leaven would have worked. He would instruct the ignorant in
the ways of Court life, he would water their growing knowledge with
disgust, he would evolve a strongly socialistic class of ignorant
content. Then, and not till then, would he clench the matter by the
withdrawal of his stock, threatening letters to his debtors, and plain
speaking to the electorate which he commanded.

Prince Petros’s scheme was far different, and infinitely less sagacious.
He would get his permanent in the Assembly; he would, during one of
Sophia’s absences, get himself trusted by the anti-dynastic party which
it should be Malakopf’s business to form. He would be a model of
sedulous industry in his attendances at the House, reaping a harvest of
golden opinions from the legislators, and at the end down would come in
full spate from the mountains of moral indignation his torrent of
broken-hearted eloquence. The revenues of the State had been squandered
for years past--he admitted and deplored it; their Sovereign was at
Monte Carlo--the time was come when these things could not be borne in
silence--wasting her moneys there. Her child--his child--had been
initiated by her into the mysteries of a game which he was told was
called baccarat. He was here to tell them that he resigned his seat in
the Assembly, for he was in a false position. He did not represent one
whom he was nominally there to represent; he represented plain living
and high thinking, his position was therefore false, and to be in a
false position was more than he could bear. Overcome by his emotion,
torn by conflicting affection, he would sit down; a murmur, carefully
prepared by his poor friend the Prime Minister, would swell up round
him. Then, recovering himself with an effort, he would get up to leave
the House; the House would rise to their feet; a voice would say, ‘Stay,
do not go’; the chorus would be taken up; and next day he would write a
polite letter to Sophia, saying that he had been elected Prince of
Rhodopé by the Assembly, while she had become the Princess Sophia, wife
of the Prince of Rhodopé.

Such was the roughly-sketched outline of their schemes as conceived by
the two conspirators. The working of the plot, as has been mentioned,
was entrusted to Malakopf, the Prince’s part being confined to an
industrious attendance on public business until their sowing had
ripened. Up to this point, at any rate, the plans of each pulled with
the other; at that point they parted. Malakopf had no intention of
letting the Prince make his pathetic speech in the House, or of himself
organizing any sympathetic murmurs, and the Prince had no intention of
any official but himself supreme in Rhodopé. The throne was to be for
him and his children after him. He was unwise enough to give Malakopf a
sketch of what he had designed the progress of affairs to be, and the
other had smilingly acquiesced, saying it was singular how completely
identical the Prince’s forecast was with his own. And Petros turned
aside, and thought to himself, ‘Poor dear old Malakopf!’

The business of securing the Prince a permanent seat in the Assembly was
carried through the next week, but not without some little opposition.
The suggestion of the Princess that her husband should take her place in
her absence had been received with unanimous cordiality as coming from
her, but this further step was not understood to have been initiated
where the first had been, and there were those who opposed. But this
opposition fully suited Malakopf’s hand; he did not wish Prince Petros
to think that the matter was easily accomplished. The more he felt
himself indebted to the Prime Minister, the better; he would be thus
less likely to take incautious steps on his own initiative, for Malakopf
was fully alive to the danger of Petros making a false move, and thus
involving the plans of both in ruin.

But the thing was carried through, and Prince Petros, who had gracefully
absented himself from the sitting in which it was to come under
discussion, was informed of the success of the motion in a letter from
the Prime Minister, who was again to dine with him that evening.
Malakopf suggested that he should at once tell Sophia what had happened,
since it was always wise to be frank about matters which it was
impossible to conceal, and that he should take his seat next day or as
soon as he received a favourable reply from her.

The Prince at once telegraphed in private cipher to his wife, and was
pleased to get the following answer before Malakopf arrived that
evening:

     ‘Am charmed to hear it. You can take a great deal off my hands, and
     I am sure you will do the work well. Shall stay at Monte Carlo till
     further notice, since there is no longer any need of me at Rhodopé.
     Have lost heaps of money.--SOPHIA.’

This was entirely satisfactory, and Malakopf, to whom he read the
telegram, thought so too. The clause ‘Since there is no longer any need
of me at Rhodopé’ seemed to both a word of good omen. The last sentence
also quite delighted the Prime Minister.

‘From what you know of the Princess,’ he said, ‘do you imagine that her
losses will tend to make her come away the sooner?’

‘It will be a reason the more, if reason was wanted,’ said Petros, ‘for
making her remain. Oh, I know her as I know my gloves.’

‘So I hoped. And if she loses more--if she loses all the money she has
in hand, would she borrow?’

‘Of whom?’

Malakopf paused. He was not sure that he was not talking with a risk.
But he decided to chance it, as he had the highest opinion of the idiocy
of his fellow-conspirator.

‘Of me, for choice,’ he said at length.

Prince Petros flushed; he did not quite like this.

‘Her Royal Highness would probably apply to her husband,’ he said
stiffly, ‘if she was in want of money.’

‘And would you lend it her?’

‘Certainly not. I should request her to come home.’

‘Then you would be acting unwisely,’ said Malakopf, knowing he had done
right to open this point. ‘Do you not see that the more hopelessly she
beggars herself, and the more deeply she gets into debt to someone, you
or another, by so much the more are our plans advanced? If we are to
overthrow the dynasty--dethrone the Princess Sophia, I mean--she must
meet us half-way; she must run to meet her ruin.’

‘I am sure she would not apply to you for money,’ said Petros--‘not
directly, at least.’

‘Indirectly, perhaps,’ suggested Malakopf.

‘You mean through me?’

‘This is what I mean,’ said the Prime Minister, bridling his irritation
at the comparative slowness of the man: ‘How would it be if, when she
applied to you for money, you borrowed it of me? Does not the idea
strike you as sound? You would in the Assembly acknowledge your
indebtedness to me, but, as you so finely sketched, in pathetic degrees
it would be drawn from you how the debt was incurred, to shield whom
from European exposure. For, indeed, not even the loyalty of Rhodopé
would stand their Princess being notorious for not paying her gambling
debts. My suggestion seems to me a double-edged weapon. It would cut
against the Princess; it would move pity and compassion for you.’

‘I think you are right,’ said the Prince reluctantly.

‘And I know I am right,’ thought Malakopf, who saw in this little scheme
a hold not so much over Sophia--she would be easily managed--but over
Prince Petros.

The Prince was formally installed in the Assembly next day. As Regent he
occupied Sophia’s place, but his permanent seat when taking part in the
debates was with the other Ministers in the body of the House. He was
well received, even, he thought, enthusiastically--for applause sounds
loud in the ears of its recipient--and he made a speech which he thought
excellently telling, as it would sound loyal to the loyal, and to any
who might not be blind to his wife’s edifying absences from the
Assembly a hint that even her husband deplored her conduct.

‘It has been my lot during the last fortnight,’ he said, ‘to have
received two very great honours at the hand of this august Assembly.
Last week only I was admitted to the House to act as Regent for Her
Royal Highness my beloved wife. That moment was very sweet to me, for it
showed me in how loyal an esteem you held her, in adopting her
suggestion that I should during her absence do my very humble best to
fill her place. I am unable to tell you how unworthy I felt myself, how
incapable of following her steps, of acquainting myself with the
infinite details of procedure which she knows so well, but I do not
think that any man can ever have made a stronger determination to do all
that in him lies than I. To-day the honour you have done me is more
personal. My lords and gentlemen, I thank you from the bottom of my
heart for it. I am comparatively a stranger among you, but you have
treated me as a friend. You have made me one of yourselves, and I too,
with you, have my part in the glorious responsibility of furthering the
interests of this realm of Rhodopé. The Princess Sophia has telegraphed
to me her warm approval of this step. She will thus be able, she said,
to take a few more weeks of that holiday she so much needs. Gentlemen, I
thank you--I thank you; I can say no more.’ And the Prince’s voice
choked with emotion, and he sat down.

For the next week he was a pattern of sedulous attention to public
affairs. He spoke on the Criminal Law Amendment Act with marked ability,
and the _Rhodopé Courier_ referred to his speech as a _locus classicus_
on the psychology of crime. His short contribution to the debate on the
Hares and Woodcock Bill was masterly. In this he espoused the cause of
the landlord against the tenant. What was not put into the ground by the
tenant clearly belonged to the landlord, and to repeal any portions of
the Game Laws of 1852, as had been suggested, was surely a short-sighted
policy. To abolish the close time, to abolish the necessity for licenses
to kill game, was to exterminate it. What had been the result of the
repeal in Greece, a country once as rich in game as theirs? Was not the
whole of the Peloponnese desert of wild animals? On the question of
tobacco-growing he showed himself equally conversant with the salient
points of the dispute. He had naturally a fine delivery, and his voice
was a marvel of tone and clearness. He never hesitated for a word; he
never hurried. He was in his seat at the opening of the debates; he
never left until the end. He was always courteous, obliging, and
encouraging, and, like the speeches of all great statesmen, his remarks
were distinguished by a keen grasp of the obvious.

Malakopf watched his entry into this public life with amusement and
satisfaction. No tool could have been more apt, and the work he turned
out was excellent. At present the growing popularity of the Prince was
exactly what he wished to see. The more he shone in State matters, the
dimmer would become the light of the Princess. When the one had reached
its necessary brilliance, and the other suitably declined, he would
again intervene. In the meantime, the Prince gave him impeccable
dinners, priceless wines, and conversation that was positively
interesting owing to its extreme naïveté.

Princess Sophia, while the moles were at work under the feet of her
throne, had much enjoyed herself at Monte Carlo. During the early days
there she had been the victim of a run of extreme ill-luck, but the
second half of August saw her more than quits. She had begun her little
outing with unwonted soberness, never staking on one number, often
backing a dozen, and occasionally even so far demeaning herself as to
bet by the hour on the colour. On this ignoble plan she had lost with
great regularity, and, as her stakes were usually high, with fair
rapidity. She became disgusted, almost bored, and returned with ardour
to her more hazardous procedure. The fickle goddess was charmed at the
recantation of the heresies which could never have been permanent, and
had looked on her with peculiar favour, and thus it came about that in
the third week in September, even before the House, which the fine
example of Petros had rendered even more conscientious and industrious
than usual, had risen, she announced by telegram her earlier return, and
the return of forty thousand napoleons.

Petros went down to Mavromáti to meet the _Felatrune_, and she seemed
pleased and a little surprised to see him.

‘I should have thought your duties in the Assembly would not have
allowed you leisure to come,’ she said. Then, suddenly laying her hand
on his shoulder, ‘How you have grown, Petros!’ she said; and it seemed
to Petros that she was in the mood to be amused, for she laughed at her
own remark, which seemed to him so void of point that he did not even
remember to repeat it to Malakopf, who would probably not have been
amused at all.




CHAPTER VII.

THE PRINCESS’S CLUB.


Princess Sophia, on her return to Amandos, found the affairs of State
more irksome, if possible, than ever. The innumerable petty businesses
to which she had to give her attention seemed more than usually futile
to her, and there was no table handy where, after a day of unutterably
wearisome routine, she could forget the Mayor and the wife of the Mayor,
and the potatoes and tobacco, in the enchanting uncertainties of
roulette. Prince Petros, at her request, relieved her during the day of
a large part of her duties; but in the evening, when she would have been
glad to get a game of bezique even with him--for his card-playing had
strangely gone off of late--there was often some committee at which, so
he assured her, the presence of one of them necessary.

It had more than once seemed to her that this recurrence of committees
waxing more frequent than under her father, and she noted the
circumstance as a curious one. There seemed, now that the House had
risen, an interminable deal of business to be transacted, and it was
more often than not that Malakopf was closeted with the Prince for an
hour or two after dinner. Again and again it happened that she and her
husband would have just sat down to a game, when it was announced that
the Prime Minister was below, and wished to consult the Princess on a
matter of urgent importance. On such occasions she always asked Petros
to represent her, since she really could not face Malakopf, and he
obeyed with cheerful alacrity.

It was during one of these interviews--a tiresome after-dinner
interruption--when the Princess was left yawning to herself in the
drawing-room, that an idea occurred to her, so simple in itself, and so
easy of execution, that she was lost in astonishment at her own
stupidity that she had not thought of it before. What could be more
obvious than that the remedy for these terrible days and interrupted
evenings was in the establishment of a casino at Amandos, where she
could play not this tiresome bezique, but the real unapproachable
roulette? And she rose from her chair, and fairly danced round the room
at the thought. She would send for Pierre--the inimitable Pierre--the
most discreet and attentive of croupiers. He should manage the tables
for her, and receive a magnificent salary. Oh, heavens! what a relief it
would be to slip out of the House for a recuperative hour in the
casino--to forget for a little the unrivalled tedium of State affairs!
The casino should be built on Crown land, close to the Palace garden,
and there should be a quiet entrance through a private gate into the
place, to save going round the garden walls. There should be a little
red room, like that in which she had played so often at Monte Carlo, and
which of late the obsequious manager had reserved for her when there was
a party with her, where Pierre, urbane and infallible, should set the
little ball spinning, with his thrilling plain-song chant, ‘_Faites vos
jeux, messieurs et mesdames--faites vos jeux!_’

The entrance of Petros interrupted her rosy visions, and before he was
well inside the room:

‘Oh, Petros, I have such an idea!’ she cried. ‘I shall start a nice
little casino here at Amandos, and while you, you dear industrious old
thing, are having your endless interviews with centipede Malakopf, I
shall run across and just take ten minutes at roulette--a breath of
fresh air. It shall be built on that piece of land, just outside the
garden, where you wanted to have an asylum for decayed and idiotic old
gentlemen, and Pierre shall be the manager.’

Now, though Malakopf often groaned under the slowness of the Prince,
Petros was not altogether without wits. Perhaps his late interview with
Malakopf had sharpened them--indeed, he seemed to Sophia to have
acquired a certain quickness lately, though not at cards; but, at any
rate, he saw at once that Sophia was coming to meet their schemes
half-way, as Malakopf had wished she should. A reigning Princess,
winning and losing money from her loyal subjects, could not be
construed into an edifying spectacle, and he made no doubt that the
people of Rhodopé would agree with him. She could not, so he thought,
have hit on a more simple and direct method of dividing the folk into
two parties--one for her (a small one, he hoped), and one (consequently
a large one) against her. Truly she was sowing the seed of a revolution
broadcast, and it would grow up armed men against herself. His face was
a miracle of delighted sympathy.

‘Oh, Sophia,’ he cried, ‘how great an idiot you must think me for never
having suggested that! Oh, if I had only had the idea, the casino should
have been ready when you returned! It should have been built in a day,
like a fairy-palace, to pleasure you. And Pierre, Pierre is just the
man--sober and steady, and full of the divine fire. I remember his
laying his hand on his heart one night after one of those evenings,
those dear evenings, we spent together at Monte Carlo, and saying: “I
adore the Princess! None plays so finely as she!”’

Sophia was charmed with his readiness to take her idea up.

‘At last, and at last!’ she cried. ‘Oh, Petros, my soul is sick for
roulette!’

‘Poor dear Sophia,’ said he, ‘and I am afraid you find me grown very
dull. But it is true you have every reason to find me dull; I am so
taken up with these public affairs, that the work has become a passion
to me. In my little way, I have tried to fulfil these duties; at first,
I allow, with distaste, but the performance of them has brought its own
reward.’

‘Ah, copy-books--copy-books!’ cried Sophia, laying her hands laughingly
on his shoulder.

‘Copy-books--even so, Sophia,’ he said. ‘The proper study of mankind is
man, and it is better to be useful than to be clever. I am full of such
thoughts. And it is dull for you. Would that I could do more, however.’

‘You are a dear, good man, Petros,’ she said, ‘and I am delighted with
you.’

‘I have done my best,’ he said, with a quiet dignity and an extreme
sincerity of manner.

He glanced for a moment at a bundle of papers he held in his hand.

‘No, no,’ cried Sophia; ‘you shall not attend to any more business
to-night. What are those papers? Throw them into the grate, and talk to
me about the casino.’

The man had his part at the finger-tips.

‘The latter with pleasure, the former I must refuse to do,’ he said.
‘How would you greet me, Sophia, if I came to you next week and said
your Civil List had not been paid, or that a deputation insisted on
waiting on you? What is the time? Just eleven. Well, we will sit and
talk, and soon I must go back to work. No, no,’ he cried, as she would
laughingly have taken the papers from him; ‘it is for dull old people
like me to do this sort of work. You shall not see any of them,
Sophia;’ and with a quick motion he folded them up and put them in his
pocket.

But he had had a rather awkward moment. It was quite true that they were
not for Sophia to see, since among them was a note from Malakopf
containing urgent advice to him not to be in too great a hurry, and
quoting Napoleon to that effect.

So--for there was no law in Rhodopé against gambling, and not likely to
be while Sophia lived--the Princess’s casino rose apace. The marble
quarries belonging to the Crown grew loud with the chisel, and
unceasingly poured forth their translucent treasures to pleasure the
Princess; for the hangings of her rooms the silk-worms toiled and span,
and for their colouring the purple shells of Tyre worked their miracles;
for her the looms of the Orient clashed and wove, and the red roses on
Arab stuffs grew thicker than the stars at night.

By spring the walls had risen to their full stately height, and
Duvelleroys, of Paris, who had contracted for the finishing and
decorations of the establishment, were already sending out their artists
and argosies. A flight of broad marble steps, balustraded in a grotesque
flamboyant style, led up to the great terrace running along the west
front, which overlooked the town of Amandos, and commanded a magnificent
sea-view. In summer this would be an out-of-door dining-room, where the
player would cool his fevered brain by the contemplation of the infinite
sea, and the sight of the sun setting in amber clouds behind the
northern cape of Corfu. Double doors gave entrance to a marble flagged
hall, from which opened the various cardrooms; on the left was the
largest public-room, for roulette only, and a cabinet off this, with
scarlet satin walls, was called the Princess’s room. Straight in front
of the entrance were the rooms for baccarat, and on the right was what
Sophia called the nursery, a room devoted to the innocent, if somewhat
lugubrious, pursuit of ‘little horses’ and the ‘train’; but, as she
said, a finished gambler was made, not born, and the young needed
education. A smoking-room, containing a bar and a white marble statue of
Luck, from the chisel of Augier, blindfold and smiling on one side of
the mouth, completed the square.

On the first floor were the dining-room and the various drawing-rooms,
where the less orthodox games of whist, picquet, and bezique might be
played; while the downstairs rooms of the club--so Sophia named it--were
devoted to the truer forms of play. Thus, as she acutely observed,
extremes could be seen meeting, for in her club, as in all other clubs,
whist was only allowed in certain rooms.

Upstairs, again, over the dining and drawing-rooms, were some twenty
bedrooms, so that the most thorough devotees--those, in fact, who were
purged of all other desires--need not leave the club night or day, and
the goddess of their worship might directly watch, if so she felt
disposed, over their slumbers, and send them dreams full of the true
religion.

Malakopf saw the building go up with mixed feelings. At first he had
been quite of the same mind as Prince Petros, agreeing that the Princess
was playing most directly into their hands and forwarding their schemes.
But the reception of the prospectus by the people, and the avidity with
which the shares in the undertaking were snatched up--for the Princess
had floated a company--was somewhat puzzling to him. Hitherto gambling
had been almost unknown in Rhodopé, always excepting in the precincts of
the palace, but the idea of gaining rouleaux of gold by merely sitting
in an admirably comfortable arm-chair in a beautiful room seemed to have
taken strong hold on the public imagination. The shares were divided
into £60,000 of ordinary shares, and £40,000 of debenture stock, which
were to pay 5 per cent. The Princess had herself invested £10,000 in the
ordinary shares, and Prince Petros, with characteristic caution, £5,000
in debenture stock; but within three hours of the subscription being
opened, every share was taken up. The stock was issued at par, but
before the week was out it was already quoted at 115, and before the
building was complete it reached 120, and Prince Petros was strongly
inclined to sell out, though the fear of his wife’s scorn prevented him.

Here, too, Malakopf had acted with Semitic prudence. Supposing by any
chance the Princess should, in some unforeseen way, frustrate the
scheme of himself and Petros, and she and her gambling continue to
throne it over Rhodopé, it would be well to have a foot in her camp, and
while investing only £1,000 under his own name, he telegraphed from
Vienna in the name of a large banking firm there to secure £10,000 of
ordinary shares, or as many as might be allotted.

But these three were the only large investors, and for the most part the
money was made up by small speculators, on the strength, so it seemed,
of the Princess’s name. Ten fishermen from Mavromáti, for instance, who,
so to speak, did not know red from black, clubbed together and purchased
a £100 ordinary share; a wild-eyed shepherd-boy came in from the remote
hills, and asked for twenty francs worth of the new club; and the head
of the Education Department put a question in the Assembly as to whether
it was permissible to invest the surplus of the Government grant in the
Princess’s company.

Now, Malakopf, astute politician as he was, and unrivalled astronomer of
the financial heaven, could not with certainty interpret these signs of
the times. The readiness with which the subscription was taken up seemed
to augur either a greater popularity of the Princess than he had
bargained for, or a love of gambling in her subjects hitherto void of
fruition. If either of these interpretations was correct--and he did not
see a loophole for a third--it argued not well for the success of the
anti-dynastic conspiracy. He had hoped that there would be some
outburst of popular feeling against the scheme, or an unfriendly
reference to it in the Assembly. It is true there had been some great
outburst of popular feeling, but that had been in favour of it; and as
for the unfriendly reference in the Assembly, that was still unspoken.
For himself, he dared not allude to it in a hostile spirit (Prince
Petros’s tongue was also tied), for he had openly invested £1,000 in the
company, and he would without doubt be called ugly names if, after that,
he showed public disapproval of it. More than that, supposing he
organized a successful opposition to it, he stood fair to lose that much
larger sum which he had covertly put into it. Of his two possible
interpretations for the success of the subscription, he much preferred
to attribute it to the popularity of the Princess, for if a latent love
of gambling was innate in the hearts of the Rhodopians, he had to face
the fact that before long she would be doubly endeared to her subjects,
since, considering her merely as a gambler, she was unique and
magnificent--even Petros, with his system, allowed that--and there were
no two words to the question.

Prince Petros meantime watched the rising walls with a daily accession
of disgust and misgiving. He was a skilful card-player, but he was not a
gambler. His daydream of seeing Sophia go evening after evening to empty
and depopulated rooms, to find Pierre mournfully yawning behind his
hand, and regretting the gay stir and bustle of Monte Carlo, was
replaced by a vision which showed him Sophia crowned and honoured queen
of the gamblers. He was both more sanguine and more easily cast down
than his acuter colleague. He had foreseen a complete and immediate
success when the idea of a club was put to him by his wife, where
Malakopf had only seen a possible factor of success; and similarly now,
while Malakopf was dubious, the Prince was frankly despondent.

‘There is no hope here,’ he said to the Prime Minister one day, ‘where I
had hoped so much. She is more popular than ever, and the gold burns in
the people’s pockets while they wait for the club to be opened. They are
gamblers--born gamblers--I am sure of it, and she is the finest of them
all. You can take my word for it, there is no one in the world with so
fine a style. They will worship her method of play, they will adopt it
universally, so far as their more timorous natures permit, and she will
pile success on success. Half Rhodopé will think of nothing but doubling
their winnings, the other half of repairing their losses. I almost wish
I had never come to this damnable country. Rhodopé will become a
roulette-board, and I of infinitely less moment than the marble which
the croupier sets spinning.’

Malakopf moved impatiently in his chair. He no longer treated the Prince
in private with the least form of ceremony.

‘Oh, for God’s sake, do not be so fretful and childish!’ he said. ‘If I,
who am as cunning as the devil and as wise as the original serpent,
cannot yet make up my mind how this experiment of your wife’s will turn
out, how is it possible for you to see the issues with such clearness?
You do not grasp the situation. This new club is a new factor in our
scheme; it is quite likely that it is a factor against us. On the other
hand, it may indirectly give us an opportunity. We have to wait, so let
us do so like reasonable men. I have no patience with prophets--there is
no such thing as prophecy; the whole world is one calculation. You have
not calculated; you only prophesy. I never prophesy; but I am not
without a mathematical gift.’

‘You are not tied by the ankle to the steps of a throne,’ retorted
Petros. ‘You do not know Sophia as I know her, and, what is more, you
have only a thousand pounds in this precious club.’

Malakopf had not told, and did not intend to tell, Petros about his
further investment, and he replied:

‘You are wholly wrong, my dear Prince. Because you drink tea with
Princess Sophia, and see her in her stays, you think you know her better
than I. Perhaps you know the people better also. I, at any rate, know
that she is capable of almost anything--certainly of any piece of
extravagant folly, but also, I am afraid, of a consummate stroke of
Statecraft. If I were to take to prophesying in your spirit, an uneasy
man would be standing in your shoes. You don’t see a quarter of the
possible risks we may have to run, but you see no more of our possible
opportunities. But observe, I never prophesy, and I have not yet enough
data to tell how this affair will turn out. Be good enough to wait;
nothing was ever done in a hurry, though things may be done fast.’

Pierre, obedient to the commands of his adored Princess, arrived in the
month of April, and expressed himself charmed with all the arrangements,
and more than gratified with his salary. The Princess gave him audience
at the Palace on the day of his arrival, talked to him for an hour with
great vivacity, and would have liked to ask him to dinner, if it were
only to see Petros’ face when she told him who her guest was. But she
refrained, and Pierre, who would have been greatly embarrassed by the
honour, was allowed to take his departure in peace.

The club was formally opened on the first of May, so breathless had been
the speed with which the Princess’s plans were put into execution, and
she herself performed the ceremony in full state. Levée dress with
orders was worn, and the gardens of the Casino presented the most
brilliant appearance. Only those who had paid their subscriptions and
become members of the club were allowed in the spacious grounds, but it
really seemed as if all Rhodopé were members. The Princess had arranged
quite an imposing little ceremony, resembling the enthronement of a
bishop. Followed by Petros and her ministers, she walked up the steps of
the south veranda, and in breathless silence tapped at the closed doors
leading into the great hall. From inside Pierre’s voice asked, ‘Who is
there?’ The Princess thereupon replied: ‘I, Sophia, hereditary Princess
of Rhodopé,’ on which Pierre threw the doors open, and, bowing low,
preceded her to the big public room, while the Guards’ band in the
gallery trumpeted out the Rhodopé anthem. Arrived at the large roulette
room, she, Prince Petros, Malakopf, the Mayor of Amandos, the
Minister of the Interior, the first Lord of the Admiralty, the
Commander-in-Chief, the Lord Chancellor, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, and the Chairman of Council, took their places round the table,
and Pierre seated himself in the croupier’s place. Sophia had also asked
the Bishop of Amandos to take his place with them, adding, however, that
as scruples might stand in his lordship’s way, this was to be considered
as an invitation and not a command, and as an invitation he had refused
it. Everyone then staked twenty-seven napoleons (the same number being
the years of the Princess) on a half-dozen of numbers, and Pierre set
the momentous ball spinning. Round and round it went, slowed down,
wavered, and finally lurched into zero, the number backed by the bank.

Princess Sophia sprang up and clapped her hands.

‘An omen!’ she cried--‘a magnificent omen! Success to the club of
Amandos! Pierre, I wish my stake had been a hundredfold what it was!’

Then, recollecting ceremony, she bowed to the crowds which had followed
them into the room, and stood there while the table was opened.

‘Ladies and gentlemen,’ she said, with a wonderful dignity of manner,
‘I declare this room formally opened. There is no need for me to remind
you how ancient and venerable is the practice of gambling. Cultivate,
let me beg you, a calm demeanour at the tables, and bow your heads
cheerfully and obediently to the decision of pure chance. Long may the
club supply to you a little pleasurable excitement, and may Luck ever
favour the deserving!’

Again bowing, amid a tumult of applause, she and the high officials who
had attended her left the room, and no sooner were they out than there
was a positive scramble for the places. Members of the Assembly,
fishermen from the coast, tradesmen of the town, wild shepherdfolk from
the hills, jostled and pushed together to secure a place.

Sophia, in the hall outside, heard the noise with rapture.

‘This will be a success, gentlemen,’ she said; ‘let us congratulate
ourselves.’

The Royal Party took a hasty luncheon, without speeches, on the terrace
outside, and as soon as she had drunk her coffee Sophia visited each of
the rooms in turn, all of which were crowded with eager gamblers. In
each she had seen that there was a chair on the croupier’s right with a
crown, and her initial embroidered on it, and in each room she now took
her seat and played a few stakes. She was watched with eager and
admiring eyes, for, as usual, she played with a splendid recklessness
and the most imperturbable demeanour, doubling and redoubling her stake
after she had lost, and placing it here, there, anywhere that took her
fancy. Her luck was extraordinarily good, and her dash and boldness were
suitably rewarded. The people, in whose nature, as Malakopf had
suspected, there lurked an innate love of gambling, were charmed and
lost in wonder. She had given them a characteristic style, and until
some twenty years ago, when the casino at Amandos was turned into an
asylum for decayed and idiotic old gentlemen, there was nowhere in the
world where you could see such glorious ventures and such desperate
punting as in the building that Princess Sophia opened on this sunny
first of May.

The gambling instinct spread like some medieval plague over the country.
Shepherds coming to Amandos with their sheep for market would rush from
their careful bargainings to the reckless chances of the table. A whole
column of the _Amandos Herald_ was devoted to the record of the same
(just as in the _Times_ we have a column of Money Market), analyzing a
run of luck, or giving the total sum a man would have gained who had
continued to back a certain six numbers from 10.30 to 11.30.

The manufacture of roulette-boards, which Sophia, with a far-reaching
prudence, had made a Government monopoly, bid fair to become a valuable
revenue. They were plain, but very well made, and the enormous
quantities in which they were supplied enabled her to sell them at a
price which put them within everybody’s reach. She also instituted an
Order of the Zero, the first grade of which was to be conferred only on
European princes of blood royal; but the second was the reward of
continuous and orthodox play, and was conferred on the recommendation of
Pierre.

The restaurant accommodation in the casino was soon found to be totally
inadequate, and the plot of ground immediately adjoining the club garden
was bought at a fancy price by a native speculator, and on it was run up
with breathless speed an immense hotel and restaurant. From foreign
countries people flocked in shoals to the new Temple of Chance, at first
from curiosity, but later from delight in its charms, and found that the
fame of its magnificence, the beauty of the scenery, and the
invigorating quality of the mountain air had been done scant justice to.
Eminent physicians, who knew that the body is reached through the subtle
gateways of the mind, no less than the mind through the subtle gateways
of the body, and that for many bad health is the direct result of being
bored, recommended, honestly and wisely, a month at Rhodopé for anæmic
and nerve-ridden people. Success scarcely ever failed to attend on the
cure when the case was properly diagnosed; for the air itself was a
tonic of divine prescription, and the mind was not, as in so many of
those unspeakable mountain resorts, left to rot and breed disease, but
was intelligently entertained at the casino. The English people above
all flocked to Amandos, for, as they said, the folk are not like
foreigners, one would really take them for English; and when they of
Albion take up this attitude, it is pretty certain that the place will
be popular among their compatriots. Their insular aloofness fell from
them like scales in Rhodopé--it was as good as being at home. And with
the English came a Church of England chaplain, hip-baths, one most
hazardous golf-links on the mountain side, and another on the sandy
fore-shore of Mavromáti, and the ties were complete.

During these summer months the Prince and Malakopf met often, but they
found long faces for each other. Their faces would have been longer
still had they known how completely their little plans had miscarried,
and that already the Princess was very tolerably acquainted with what
was going on. The betrayal had happened in this wise.

It was on the occasion of the Queen of England’s birthday, and Malakopf,
with the other Ministers, dined officially at the British Legation. The
dinner was for men only, but after dinner Lord Abbotsworthy gave a
reception. He was a widower, and the duty of receiving his guests fell
on his daughter, Lady Blanche. The spacious marble-flagged terrace in
front of the house was covered in with a Syrian tent, and the guests for
the most part, after shaking hands with Lady Blanche, passed through the
rooms and into the illuminated coolness of the covered terrace.

Now Malakopf, who for several weeks before this festivity had been
somewhat fretted by the harshness and uncertainty of the events which
followed on the opening of the Princess’s club, and by the continued
despondency of his colleague, had promised himself an evening free from
restraint, and in two senses to give his tongue a treat. He
proposed--for he of that odious class of voluptuary which fixes its
debauches beforehand--to dine as his nature, or rather the
unexceptionable chef of the Minister, prompted him, and to drink as
copiously as the excellence of the vintage with which he was served
suggested. Now, Lord Abbotsworthy, who was himself a great judge of
grape-juice, had made out with some care the menu of the wines, and his
choice was masterly. The consequence was that Malakopf, who had passed a
really memorable hour in the dining-room, eating much and drinking the
best and plenty of it, came upstairs in an unusually relaxed frame of
mind. It would be entirely out of the question to have called him drunk,
or anything like it, but the sunshine which lay upon the slopes of the
champagne country in the comet year had stirred his imagination and
unloosed his tongue. Naturally he was a silent man, but to-night he was
prone to be talkative; a woman’s wit did the rest.

Lady Blanche had been much interested in and somewhat distressed at the
opening of the Princess’s club. She was a young lady gifted with a great
deal of intelligent curiosity; that is to say, the things she was
curious about were always worth knowing, and she particularly wished to
know how this extraordinary innovation struck the leading men of the
State. She had heard with a glow of the heart the tremendous reception
accorded to her dear friend Princess Sophia; but she intensely desired
to learn how those in command took this new evidence of the Princess’s
popularity, whether, in fact--the same question had occurred to
Malakopf--the greeting had been merely the tribute of a loyal people to
a popular Princess, or whether it implied an innate predisposition to
the new amusement provided for them.

It was with this in her mind that, when the duty of reception was over,
she walked slowly through the room, with one ear only open to the voice
of her varying interlocutor, the other wide to catch the strident
accents of the Prime Minister. At last she saw him, though only
distantly, wide-mouthed, yellow-toothed, separated from her by a crowd
of tedious folk; but as she looked in his direction, it so happened that
he looked in hers, and their eyes met. Malakopf’s eye was a shifty one
at the best; but to-night’s potations seemed to have given him a greater
directness of gaze, and it was with no surprise that, in answer to her
little smile of greeting, she saw him a moment afterwards move from his
place and make his way through the crush towards her.

‘Ah, Lady Blanche,’ he said, ‘but unless I push and squeeze I shall have
no chance of getting a word with you. How is it that when we go to a
friend’s house we see the whole world, but not our friend?’

‘And I, too, was despairing of getting a word with you,’ replied
Blanche. ‘It is a delicious night: let us go on to the balcony; the
rooms are so hot.’

Malakopf bowed and offered her his arm.

‘You are too kind to an old man like me,’ he said; ‘but I am very
greedy.’

This was quite true; and they sat down in a corner of the balcony, and
Blanche went straight to the point.

‘There are great changes in Rhodopé,’ she said. ‘Tell me how it all
strikes you.’

Malakopf paused a moment; his instinct counselled caution; but his
dinner had unloosened his tongue, and he longed to let himself go and
talk freely to this beautiful and able woman.

‘I don’t really know how it strikes me; indeed, I confess myself
puzzled,’ he said. ‘At any rate, I think the Princess is a cleverer
woman than I had supposed. Do you follow that?’

Blanche nodded.

‘You mean, of course, that the success of the club has more than
justified her starting it; that she knew or guessed--which is even
cleverer--that there was a love of gambling in the people?’

Malakopf applauded gently with his finger-tips.

‘My dear lady,’ he said, ‘you have no idea what a joy it is to me to
talk to people who find me intelligible, to whom I have not to
translate. Now, Prince Petros----’ and he paused. ‘I think I shall
advertise for a translator,’ he added, with a sigh.

‘Prince Petros has always seemed to me a man with all the charm of
cleverness and the brains of a fool,’ remarked Blanche.

Malakopf considered.

‘Yes, you have hit him full,’ he said at length. ‘I have always known
what you have just said, though I have never been able to formulate it.
It is the charm of cleverness that makes one continually think one is
dealing with a gifted man, and as continually one is brought up short.
Oh, how many jars I have received!’

‘He works hard in the Assembly, does he not?’ asked Blanche.

‘He works, it has always struck me, like a convict. He removes a pile of
shot from one place to another, and then back again. Thus, at the end of
the day there is not much to show for the hours of toil. I have seen
much of him lately, and he has a great power of amassing detail, which,
when amassed, is useless to him. He collects his data, and draws no
conclusion from them. Perhaps that is just as well; if he did draw
conclusions, they would be certainly wrong ones.’

‘And he is ambitious, I should think,’ said Blanche quietly.

‘Ambitious! He is ambition. He is discontented in his present position,
and, indeed, who would not be? He is a parody of a Prince, so he tells
me. “Fancy being the husband of a reigning Princess!” he says.’

‘It is wise of him, then, to work hard at humbler duties, and get
perhaps a power of another sort in the country.’

‘He has no power,’ snapped Malakopf, ‘and he never will have!’

Now, Lady Blanche had long entertained a vague curiosity about this new
intimacy between Malakopf and the Prince. Sophia, she knew, detested the
man, and that was a reason the more for surprise that Petros should make
him so close a companion. Day after day she had read in the _Rhodopé
Herald_ that Malakopf had a long interview with the Prince, that the
Prince called on the Prime Minister in the morning and remained to
luncheon, or that Malakopf remained at the Palace till midnight. Up to
this point in her present conversation with him the talk been mainly
random on her part, as one throws a fly over places indeed which may
reasonably hold a fish, but in ignorance whether a fish is there. But at
this moment, when he snapped the answer back at her, forgetting his
manners, she recollected her curiosity in the friendship between the
two, and to the point, and not witlessly, so that Malakopf could
scarcely suspect, even if his mood was suspicious, that he was being
plied with pertinent conversation.

‘No, as yet he has no power,’ she said; ‘but are you sure he never will
have? Does not his sedulous attention to questions which in themselves
can but interest him very slightly tend to make one think that he is
determined not to be only a tame cat about the Court? He is wise, I
should say, to wish to take an active part in affairs, and it seems to
me that he is wise in burdening his own shoulders with the tedious and
drearier side of politics. He won, I should say, golden opinions when he
acted as Regent last year. Moreover, which is more important, the
Princess is very grateful to him. She told me so the other day; and
gratitude is better worth collecting than postage-stamps.’

Malakopf was interested, and showed it.

‘Ah, she said that to you, did she?’ he asked, leaning forward in his
chair. ‘She spoke with gratitude, you say, and with confidence perhaps
in the Prince?’

‘Surely. Why should she not?’ asked Blanche, with a disarming frankness.

‘Rumour had reached me,’ said Malakopf, ‘that she was not altogether
pleased that the Prince should do so much, that she felt that she was a
little thrust into the background. I hardly knew whether to credit it or
not, and your information has relieved me indescribably. But if one
looks closely, there was some colour for the idea. Indeed, I had
supposed that some such desire to be as prominent as her husband had
prompted her to take this very new step of making a casino in Amandos.’

Blanche detected a slight change of tone in his voice, and would have
laid odds at that moment that he had just invented these rumours
himself. But she answered without a pause:

‘It is very ingenious to connect the building of the casino with that,
so ingenious that it certainly ought to be true. I cannot say; it never
occurred to me before. About those rumours--surely more than that has
reached you----’

Malakopf glanced round to see that no one was within hearing. He thought
that he was getting valuable information out of Lady Blanche; she, on
the other hand, was sure that she was getting it out of him.

‘Yes; I have heard more than that,’ he said, drawing his chair closer to
hers.

Blanche nodded. She felt no touch of shame for what she was doing, for
she was loyalty incarnate to Sophia and ruthless to any who were not.

‘You, too, have heard perhaps that in certain quarters it is thought
that Prince Petros is standing on tiptoe to reach the throne?’ she
asked. ‘You have heard that in certain quarters such an attempt is
likely to be widely supported? What are we to make of such things? There
cannot be any truth in them.’

‘You speak frankly,’ said Malakopf, ‘and I will follow your example. I
have heard, it is true, bitter complaints against the Princess Sophia,
and my loyalty has compelled me to listen to them, so as--so as to be on
my guard; but it has often been hard work to control my indignation when
I listened. I have heard her Civil List, and the way she spends it,
bitterly contrasted with the money spent on education and on the poor.
What is one to say to such things? I am all loyalty to our beloved
Princess, yet put yourself in the place of those who say these things
and be candid. Is there not a grain of truth in the accusation?’

Malakopf spoke eagerly, for he wanted to get out of Blanche what she
had heard, and, forgetting his manners again, leaned forward and lit a
cigarette at a candle standing close to her, enveloping her face in a
cloud of smoke. Blanche observed this. The man was certainly in earnest
about something.

‘You will have a whisky-and-soda, will you not?’ she said. ‘Touch that
bell behind you.’

Malakopf resumed his seat, and the two talked of indifferent subjects
till the footman had brought the Prime Minister his whisky; then she
spoke again.

‘Who set these things in currency?’ she asked abruptly. ‘Do you--do you
really suspect Prince Petros of disloyalty to the Princess, and, what is
worse even, of disloyalty to his wife?’

‘No, I do not,’ said Malakopf; ‘but from what you tell me, from what I
have myself heard, I gather there is much feeling against the Princess,
and much sympathy with her husband. Petros--Prince Petros--I know feels
his position acutely; more than that I could not say. But disloyalty----
Why, the man is as true as steel!’ and his voice rang as false as a
cracked crockery plate.

The conversation was bearing much fruit, so thought Lady Blanche, and so
also thought Malakopf. Lady Blanche felt convinced in her own mind that
no rumours had reached Malakopf about the Princess’s growing
unpopularity, but she had with some ingenuity led the other on to expand
embellish his invention of them as he would have them be, and with
complete success. The distrust she had ever felt of this cunning old
man, the growing distrust with which she had seen his ripening intimacy
with Petros, was suddenly struck with colour. She felt sure he was
talking out of his own mouth. Malakopf, on the other hand, was entranced
to find his airy inventions solidified and his own intuitions so
flatteringly supported; it appeared that after all there did exist in
the minds of the people that dissatisfaction with Sophia which it should
be his work and Petros’ to foment. The seeds of revolution, it seemed,
were already sown, and, to judge by the way in which Lady Blanche
endorsed his tentative words, bid fair to flourish.

‘I am glad to hear you say he is so true,’ she said. ‘Personally I know
little of him, but I have seen with so much interest the growing
intimacy between you. Who should know him, if you do not?’

Malakopf’s exultation broke the bonds of his caution.

‘Know him!’ he cried. ‘I know him as I know the shape of the glove that
covers my hand; indeed, he is very like the glove that covers my hand.’

Next moment it was as if another had spoken and the Prime Minister had
heard. He got up abruptly as these imprudent words were conveyed to him,
turned to Lady Blanche, whom for that one minute he had forgotten.

‘I will wish you good-night,’ he said; ‘I have a great quantity of work
to get through before I go to bed.’

‘You go so early?’ asked Blanche. ‘Good-night, monsieur; I have so
enjoyed our talk.’

When the other guests had gone she danced a _pas seul_ all round the
balcony.




CHAPTER VIII.

PLOTS AND COUNTER-PLOTS.


Lady Blanche had no desire to make a mountain out of a molehill, but
even when she surveyed her interview with Malakopf with the coolness and
sobriety of 9 a.m., she still thought that it was clearly her business
to make the matter known to her whom it principally concerned.
Accordingly she sent a note to Sophia asking her for an audience on an
affair of some importance, and this being granted, poured into the
Princess’s amused and interested ear all that Malakopf had said. Blanche
was a good narrator, with so admirable a memory that she had no call to
draw on her imagination, and her account was both vivid and accurate,
the rarest of combinations, and one for which we in vain look in the
pages of histories.

Princess Sophia was far too well entertained by the farcical absurdity
of the conspiracy to be really angry at present with her husband.
Malakopf, however, less simple-witted and much older, was not so lightly
dismissed. She knew the man to be cunning, and one whose investments
might be considered safe, and she fumed at the idea of a centipede
conspiring against her.

‘But there is one point which perplexes me,’ she said to Blanche.
‘Petros and that creature are in league together, that is certain, and
Petros, poor dear, I have no doubt whatever, thrones himself
prospectively over Rhodopé. Really, I married a fool after all, and one
of my requirements was that my husband should not be that. I shall get
quite indignant with him if he does not drop this nonsense. But then
where does Malakopf come in? It is quite certain that it is not worth
his while to overturn me in order to set up Petros. Without doubt he
means to step in himself; but where? He has mounted as high in Rhodopé
as a subject can; he would not take so much trouble if he was to be
nothing more.’

‘You must remember you have ever treated him like an insect, Princess,’
said Blanche. ‘Would not it be sufficient reward for him to overturn
you?’

‘No, I think not,’ said Sophia. ‘The man loathes me, of course, and no
doubt revenge would be an incentive. But I doubt revenge being his goal.
Perhaps there are wheels within wheels. Petros is to overturn me, and he
is to overturn Petros. The House of Ægina is to be a set of ninepins for
a centipede!’

‘The worst of it is that it is almost impossible to find out more,’ said
Blanche. ‘It was a lapful of luck that we know at all.’

‘It was clever of you, Blanche,’ said Sophia, ‘and clever people are
always lucky. About Petros--I shall give him one chance. I shall let
fall a word which should be a warning to him, something very plain, yet
meaningless to a good conscience, and then I shall have another talk
with you, Blanche.’

Sophia glanced at the ormolu clock on the mantelpiece, which had just
jarred as a warning of its striking.

‘Good gracious! it is nearly twelve,’ she said. ‘I shall take a stroll
in the direction--in the direction of the club. Thank you again,
Blanche; how earnestly you know. You have been instructive as well as
amusing. Really, Petros is very impertinent, now I think it over. I
shall ask you to come here again in a day or two--or, stay, I am dining
at the Legation on Friday; we will talk then, after dinner.’

The opportunity of giving a word of warning to Petros occurred that very
evening. They had dined alone, which was unusual; and after dinner,
which was still more unusual, the Prince had proposed a game of bezique.
Sophia had intended to go to the club, but she changed her mind, and
counter-ordered her carriage; for during dinner her husband had
interested her, and this proposal of his was now become remarkable.

Never in his life had the Prince been more desirous to please, but never
in his life, had he known all, had his efforts been more wildly
misdirected and futile, for during the day Sophia’s amusement had given
place to anger. In a conversation he had held with Malakopf that
morning, that sagacious Minister, conscious of a slight want of caution
the night before, had laid great stress on two points.

‘I need not tell you, my dear Prince,’ he said, ‘how essential it is
that the Princess should remain entirely unsuspicious. We have seen a
great deal of each other lately, and I reluctantly propose that we do
not meet quite so often for the future. Our intimacy might put someone
on the look-out, and if you throw a bomb where people are looking, they
will run away. That is my first point. The second point contains good
news. Already there is a widely-spread discontent in the State at the
unedifying conduct of your wife, or so it seems to people, and a large
sympathy with your untiring exertion in the Assembly. Also, I know for
certain that at present Princess Sophia reposes entire confidence in
you. Let it be your business to maintain that unabated--more, to
increase it.’

‘Who told you this?’ asked Petros.

‘One who knows her well--Lady Blanche Amesbury.’

‘Lady Blanche said she put entire confidence in me?’

‘I have the honour of telling you so,’ said Malakopf with impatience.

‘You seem to have had an intimate talk with Lady Blanche. She is a
clever woman.’

‘And I am not without wits,’ said Malakopf, chuckling, ‘and our talk was
more intimate than she knew. Indeed, she gave me all I wanted to know
with the charming naïveté of a child.’

Prince Petros was silent a moment; he did not feel entirely at ease
about this interview, but his habit of obedience to Malakopf’s orders
would not let him speak. At length, dismissing the subject, ‘Tell me how
to maintain my wife’s confidence,’ he said.

‘A little bezique in the evening would do wonders with her,’ said
Malakopf sententiously.

Thus it was that Prince Petros had proposed a game that evening, and
Sophia accepted from curiosity. During dinner he had talked charmingly,
and had related a number of amusing experiences shortly and with point.
At each Sophia’s contempt rose bitter as bile in her throat. Behind her
back he planned a revolution; before her face he paid court to the
amenities of social life, he behaved with a studied naturalness and
kindness. Knowing all she knew, these miserable little attentions seemed
to her the very acme of meanness, and it was the desire of studying him
further which made her counter-order the carriage that should have taken
her to the club. This argued a very strong desire.

They stood by the open window drinking their coffee, while the groom of
the chambers put out the table and packs of cards, and when the man had
left the room, Petros gently thrust his arm through hers.

‘It seems so long since we have spent an evening quietly together,
Sophia,’ he said. ‘To me, at least, it seems long. Sometimes I almost
wish you had been a poor girl, not the Princess of Rhodopé, that we had
been able to live quietly together up in some little mountain home.’

Sophia for the moment was struck dumb. Surely there was never so
immeasurable a hypocrite as this man! She could not answer, but since
she wished him to continue, she gently pressed his arm with hers.

‘You have felt that too, dearest?’ he continued softly. ‘Sometimes,
Sophia, I have thought you were a little weary of me. Now your sweet
silence makes me know I was wrong; so forgive me, darling. Look at that
lovely wash of moonlight over the town. It lies like a benediction over
your land. It was just such a night--was it not?--when I first came
here. I bless that day--I bless it every hour of my life.’

Sophia turned from him; the man produced in her a sense of physical
sickness. She, who with all her faults had never lied--she, to whom
falsehood was a dirty thing, as inconceivable as not washing, felt ill
at his duplicity. She was angry at herself for letting him speak, and
for a moment she was on the point of telling him she knew all. But her
anger surged up again, she could not forgive him; he had chosen to act a
crooked part, he must reap as he had sown. But she had promised herself
to give him a word of warning; that he should have.

‘Come, Petros,’ she said at length, with an assumed lightness of manner,
‘bezique, bezique. Really, I don’t know that a cottage on the mountains
would have suited me well, though it is charming of you to suggest it;
you would not have loved to find me thumbing a dirty pack of cards when
I should have been mending your stockings. There is a great deal to be
said for the position of the Princess of Rhodopé.’

He took her hand with charming courtesy and kissed it.

‘And who can say enough for the position of her husband?’ he asked.

They played a hand or two with the luck fairly divided, and Petros, who
seemed to Sophia to have recaptured his skill, was a considerable winner
at the end of an hour. But shortly after that he held a hand for which,
as Sophia declared, the world was made. He had early in the game
declared sequence six times, and then abandoned it; he had three
beziques on the table and the fourth knave of diamonds. This card he
drew in some eight tricks before the end, and still Sophia had not seen
the corresponding queen. But Petros’s heart failed him; he scored the
three beziques again with his extra knave, and immediately afterwards
drew in the missing queen.

Sophia was aghast.

‘Four thousand five hundred gone to the dogs!’ she exclaimed, with
contempt. ‘Really, Petros, you are beside yourself.’

‘It was a fault of generalship, I admit,’ said he.

Sophia looked at him very steadily. This was a good opening for what she
had to say.

‘Indeed, Petros, you are no Napoleon,’ she said. ‘You could never,
never carve a kingdom for yourself.’

So Petros had his warning, and Sophia hardened her heart against him.

As Malakopf had suggested, the two conspirators saw somewhat less of
each other for the next week or two, and more than once Sophia
thought--and, to do her justice, hoped--that Petros must have taken her
word of warning to heart. But his nauseating little tendernesses and
solicitudes for her were not diminished, and she found him infinitely
disgusting. He was acting a part, of that she was well assured, for he
was not, she knew, a man to whom caresses are habitual, and their day
had long since been over between them. What, then, could this
recrudescence of an exhibition which had never been natural to him mean
but that he wished to keep her ever surrounded with a tinsel counterfeit
of love? And for what reason could he coin its tokens in such profusion,
except that he wished her to rest assured of his unalterable devotion?
The man was putrid.

Two days after this the Princess and her husband dined together at the
English Legation. Lord Abbotsworthy, of course, took the Princess in,
and on her other side sat Malakopf. As usual, he, figuratively speaking,
licked the ground she trod on, and, as usual, she walked with her
tip-tilted nose in the air, as if he had been a disagreeable smell. But
during the course of dinner she let fall a few words which interested
him, though she spoke to the Minister, and not to him, but she intended
the words for his ear, and he sucked them greedily in.

‘I shall not leave Rhodopé till October this year,’ so Malakopf heard
her say, ‘but when I do go, I shall be away three months at the least.
Petros is so admirable, he manages affairs much better than I do, and it
really gives him something to do. Moreover, I have the completest
confidence in him, and his speeches, I believe, are considered most
sensible. I shall spend Christmas in England, I think, with my cousin.
England is often delightful at Christmas, and I don’t suppose I shall be
back here till half-way through January. The yacht? Oh yes; I love the
sea, as you know. I shall go in the yacht. Poor Petros is
sea-sick--think how absurd!’

Malakopf found much to interest him in this speech. The Princess’s long
absence was ideal to his wishes; even to the most loyal of her subjects
a three months’ sojourn abroad would appear protracted, a trial to their
belief in her unwavering devotion to their welfare. And never before, in
his recollection, had the monarch been absent on the occasion of the
great royal fête on New Year’s Day, when the Princess always gave an
immense dance to all those who had signed their names in her book, and a
great banquet in the Guildhall to the humbler citizens of Rhodopé.
There, just before midnight, she went with all her guests, and took her
stand in silence under the clock, while the great assemblage waited,
finger on lip and glass in hand, for the New Year to strike. As soon as
the twelve great shocks had proclaimed another year, she drank
prosperity to them all, and broke her glass, so that no one again might
drink from it. She herself then mingled with the crowd, and spoke a few
words to everyone she came across. Her wonderful memory made it easy for
her to recognise hundreds whom she had never consciously seen except on
this night, and a word of inquiry after son or daughter made many hearts
beat proudly.

Likewise, if the Princess was away for December, the duty of proroguing
Parliament would fall on Petros. The Assembly always rose from its
autumn Session the week before Christmas, but it was not formally
prorogued till the afternoon of the last day of December. On that day
all Members attended in Court dress, and from the throne the Princess
made a speech, thanking them for their labours in the past year. As
representative of her, Petros would speak from her seat, and Malakopf
made a mental note that a somewhat telling scene might be planned for
this occasion, and that Petros also would see a great opportunity.

They left the dining-room, foreign fashion, all together, each man
giving his arm to the woman he had taken in, and as the Princess no
longer objected even to the taste of smoke, there was no segregation of
men when they reached the drawing-room. But after a few words with one
and another of the guests, she beckoned to Lady Blanche, and the two sat
down in a corner of the drawing-room somewhat apart from the others.

Malakopf had an uneasy moment when he saw this, but already in his own
mind he had advanced matters so far that it did not matter much what the
Princess did, and running rapidly over his conversation with Lady
Blanche, he found no tangible cause for disquietude.

‘Blanche,’ said Sophia, speaking in English, ‘I have made my plans. You
have to help me, so please be very intelligent.’

‘What has happened?’ asked Blanche.

‘I have given Petros his warning, and that is over. His silence made me
sure that he knew what I meant. I told him he was no Napoleon, to carve
himself a kingdom. But his odious little attentions to me, which I
imagine are performed at Malakopf’s bidding, continue, and I think he
has made up his mind not to take warning. _Tant pis_, for I do not give
him another chance. You will hardly believe it, but the other night,
only, he made crawly little sentimental speeches to me, though we have
done with that sort of thing long ago. He said he wished we had been a
poor couple in a cottage, and he kissed my hand. The flesh of me crept.’

‘That looks like Malakopf,’ said Blanche.

‘Well, enough of Petros,’ went on Sophia. ‘To-night I talked rather loud
to your father, so that Malakopf could hear. I told him I should leave
Rhodopé in October, and not come back till the middle of January.’

‘But the New Year fête?’ asked Blanche.

‘Well, I deceived your father. I expect I shall be in Amandos before
then; to speak more exactly, I expect to be back on December the
thirty-first. However, that shall be seen. Now, before I go, I shall
give you the cipher which I use with Petros, and I want to be accurately
informed day by day how things are going. I will tell your father that I
shall be in correspondence with you, and ask him to send off your
telegrams direct from the Legation, for Malakopf is cunning enough to
suspect something if he finds you constantly sending despatches to me.
Indeed, he looked a little suspicious just now, when he saw me sit down
and talk to you.’

‘It is too dangerous,’ said Blanche. ‘Dear Sophia, don’t go away for so
long; anything may happen in so long an absence.’

‘It will be your business to warn me,’ said the Princess. ‘I have laid
my plan carefully. You must learn as much as you can about the Prince’s
and Malakopf’s little schemes, and I will return at a word from you. I
shall not go to England for Christmas, as I told your father, but be
much nearer home. By Christmas, indeed, I think I shall be at Corfu, so
that I can get back here in a few hours. Conveniently enough, the
Empress has asked me to stay with her there, and she will be incognito,
and so, of course, shall I. The sailors of the _Felatrune_ alone will
know I am here, and I can rely on absolute silence. Oh, it will be as
exciting as a run of luck!’ she cried.

‘Ah, I see,’ said Blanche, ‘you mean that you expect Malakopf will make
the scene on the day the Assembly is prorogued?’

‘That seems to me a Heaven-sent opportunity for him,’ remarked Sophia.
‘Yet perhaps Satan were the more appropriate derivative.’

Blanche burst out laughing--every now and then Sophia, in spite of her
great knowledge of English, would use a sentence of a style hopelessly
pompous, thinking to utter a crowning colloquialism--and her laugh
closed the conversation. Sophia rose, and, with mock resentment in her
voice, ‘I had more to say to you,’ she remarked, ‘but I will not be
laughed at. But I have told you all that is really important, and with
you it is not necessary to say things twice. Dear Blanche, is it true
that Lord Abbotsworthy has hired Pierre and a roulette-board for this
evening? How touching an attention! A mark of true hospitality.’

‘Pierre is waiting for your Highness,’ said Blanche, seeing that
Malakopf had drawn near them. ‘Will you go to the card-room?’

Thus it came about that Sophia was not unaware of the conspiracy which
was on foot against her. She had given her husband fair warning, and
since he persisted in his childish policy of surrounding her with a
hundred lover-like attentions, she thought it excusable and wise to have
a policy too. Sometimes she was almost stirred to pity at the futility
of his efforts to blind her, while her own seeming security was so
illegible to him. She accentuated, if possible, her distaste of State
affairs. Half of the twenty-four hours she spent at the tables of club;
she yawned behind her hand at the most important and confidential
communications of her Ministers; she was even less civil than usual (and
her civility to Malakopf was never remarkable) to her Prime Minister. It
is true that she had the easier part to play, for while Petros fished up
little attentions and an affectionate demeanour to her, as a man draws
water from a deep well, with an effort, she had but to let her natural
inclinations, her distaste of Malakopf, her taste for play, her ennui at
infinitesimal State concerns go unreined.

The effect of all this was that the conferences between her husband and
the Prime Minister lapsed into their former frequency, and not a day
passed but they were closeted together. Even the astuter Malakopf,
lulled into security by the Princess’s negligence of State matters, no
longer went through the formality of asking for her when he wished to
confer with the Crown. Yet the situation was more critical than she
knew. Already there was a party in the House almost hostile to her, for
the sedulity with which she kept her seat in the club, when should have
been in the Council Chamber, though successful in its object, namely,
that of giving increased confidence to the two main actors in the
conspiracy, had had a certain effect in alienating from her many of her
more sober-minded deputies. They saw with pain her unreasonable passion
for the cards and her total neglect of the duties of a reigning monarch.
They saw with silent sympathy the heroic efforts of the Prince to cover
the deficiencies of his wife. Himself well equipped as a debater, he was
primed and loaded by Malakopf, and his contributions to the debates were
an edification. Yet the Princess played her part with consummate skill,
and she trusted to the loyalty of the people to back her up when the
great scene came. Her yawns were the picture of realistic art, her
intolerance of Malakopf a triumph of sincerity. Thereby the caution of
the Prime Minister was slowly and insidiously relaxed, and the four
years he had originally given to the dynasty were much abbreviated in
his mind; for in its sinister depths he was revolving a new and
startling idea, suggested to him by the Princess’s absence. In itself it
was so simple that he almost distrusted it; but as the days went on it
grew more and more seductive.

August cooled into September, and the day of the Princess’s departure
for her necessary holiday was fixed for October 7. It was tacitly
understood between her and Petros that the Prince would not accompany
her, and such had been the success of his Regency the year before that
now Sophia begged him never to send her anything referring, however
remotely, to State matters.

‘I am sick of the sceptre!’ she said to him the day before she left; ‘and
you, Petros, are still rather fond of it. Oh, you remind me so much of a
child dressing up in Court finery; when it comes to put the finery on in
earnest, how bored it is! And you, Petros, if ever you held the sceptre
in your own name, you would find it a bad companion of your days and
nights. Sometimes I am almost tempted to abdicate this throne of
Rhodopé, yet what sort of private person should I make? I am a Princess
of royal blood; I cannot help it; and the burden will be with me
always.’

‘How can you say such things, dearest!’ said Petros, with well-simulated
warmth. ‘It is an idle modesty that makes you seem to be ignorant of the
adoration with which your subjects--I the humblest--regard you. Which of
them, think you, would not willingly die for you? True, you could never
be a private person, any more than a farmer’s wife could be a queen,
though she thinks she could.’

‘Well, therein I am better than the farmer’s wife,’ sighed Sophia. ‘She
thinks she could be me; I know I could not be her. But let me have a
good holiday, Petros; don’t send me anything to sign or to consider.
Consider everything yourself, and sign what you please; and get through
all the business you possibly can, so that there will not be so much
next Session.’

‘You must give me more explicit instructions, dear,’ said the Prince.
‘It is not likely that any measure of great importance will come before
the House, but what am I to do about proroguing it? You will hardly wish
me to deliver the Speech from the Throne?’

‘And why not, dear Petros?’ said she.

She was sitting in a deep armchair in shadow, fanning herself slowly, he
under the full light of a lamp, and as she spoke she leaned back and
watched his face intently. She saw his eye brighten, a flush steal over
his face, and his right hand clenched, as if it already held the
sceptre.

‘Why not, Petros?’ she repeated.

‘Because that is so essentially the prerogative of the Crown,’ he said.
‘How am I to thank your Ministers for their labours? In whose name?’

‘In your own name,’ she said; ‘for, indeed’--and she laughed quietly to
herself--‘you have had far more to thank them for, or curse them for,
this last year than I. It is far more suitable that you should do it. I
am sure you will do it admirably.’

Again his hand clenched, and again Sophia observed his face light up.
She rose with bitter aversion in her heart.

‘Thus no long explanations are necessary,’ she said. ‘Act as if you were
me. I shall be back before the end of January. And now, Petros, you must
leave me; I have some little affairs to settle before I dress for
dinner. Kindly ring the bell for me.’

He rang, and, advancing to her, bowed and kissed her hand.

‘My Queen,’ he murmured.

Sophia stood silent, and watched his graceful exit; then she took her
handkerchief, and rubbed the place where his lips had touched. Next
moment the groom of the chamber entered.

‘Go to the English Legation,’ she said, ‘and tell Lady Blanche that I
shall come to see her to-night after dinner. Leave the message with
her; see her yourself.’

The Princess left Mavromáti next day on the _Felatrune_. With her went
the little Prince Leonard, and Petros saw them off. He went on board
with his wife, but parted from her as soon as they gained the ship, for
she was to start at once. Once more pity for this treacherous man, for
so she certainly regarded him, touched her.

‘I leave you with the fullest confidence,’ she said. ‘I feel sure you
will be a faithful steward for me and my child.’

But Petros’s hypocrisy was not finished enough to suggest a reply, and
he left her in silence.

That night, while the _Felatrune_ ploughed her moonlit way southwards
over the dim waters of the sleeping Adriatic, Malakopf dined at the
Palace. Indeed, the two conspirators, to the best of their knowledge,
had solid ground for self-congratulation. From their point of view, the
Princess’s conduct had been impeccable, and the precision with which she
had played into their hands was admirable. The hours of her attendance
at the Assembly during the past summer could almost be reckoned on the
fingers of a one-armed man; the hours of her presence at the club were
more like in number to the stars of heaven. To crown all this, she had
now left the kingdom at a time when its affairs were in the full bustle
of transaction, and, what would tell against her even more in the eyes
of the public, she had decided to be absent on the great festal day of
the year. Malakopf had had the wit to see how skilful was the bait she
had prepared, how admirable its convenience to their plans; he only
failed to grasp the little fact that it was bait.

The club which the Princess had inaugurated with such brilliance in May
had thrived in a way that even she could scarce have anticipated.
Originally the playing-rooms had been open only from three in the
afternoon till three in the morning; but a few months afterwards its
session never rose. The gambling instinct in the people, for so many
years void of fruition, shot up like the aloe flower; already to tamper
with the inalienable right of the people of Rhodopé to gamble in public
rooms would have been more dangerous than to attempt to make penal in
England cold baths or the game of golf; and it was the most skilful
stroke that the ingenuity of the devil could have devised when Malakopf
attempted by this very means to dethrone Sophia from her popularity.

‘It has occurred to you,’ said the Prime Minister that evening, when he
and Petros were smoking, ‘that the Princess will be absent from Rhodopé
on the day that the Assembly is prorogued?’

‘I have talked to her about that,’ said Petros. ‘It seemed to me very
irregular; but she told me how to act.’

‘Indeed! May I have the benefit of your conversation?’

‘She wished me to take her place absolutely,’ said Petros; ‘to speak
from the throne not in her name, but in my own.’

‘Admirable!--nothing could be better,’ said Malakopf. ‘It did not occur
to you, I am afraid, to get that in black and white?’

‘The Princess does not go back on her word,’ said Petros rather stiffly.

‘True; but I should have preferred black and white. Prudence can never
be at fault. But we have our hands full.’

He paused, and decided to tell the Prince of the plan that he had been
maturing.

‘By the thirty-first of December the fruit must be ripe for the
plucking,’ he said. ‘I shall introduce a Bill next month to shut up all
gambling-houses in Rhodopé, and to make even betting an offence. What do
you think of that?’

Again he looked at the Prince to see what he would make of this. Petros
fairly recoiled.

‘It is impossible,’ he said; ‘there will be a revolution.’

‘True, there will be a revolution; but I thought we were working to
bring that about.’

‘But it is insane, this idea of yours,’ said Petros. ‘What line am I to
take, for instance? Am I to oppose you? for if I do not, my chances are
gone. Unless I speak against your Bill, the people will have none of me;
and if I speak for it, where is our combination?’

Malakopf smiled grimly.

‘I thought you did not see how valuable was the Princess’s command to
you to act absolutely in her name, or why I should have preferred it in
black and white. That command is simply the coping-stone of my
structure. You will vote for the Bill, of course; but you will speak
against it. Heaven! is it possible you are so slow? Oh, do you not see?
Reluctantly, regretfully, but with unimpeachable loyalty, you will find
yourself obliged to act in her absence, as she would have you act, as
she told you to act. She could not face the situation herself; she has
run away, and she has left you behind to face the odium of her deed. All
will vote against the Prince, as the representative of his unworthy
wife; but what sympathy there will be for Petros! As for your wife, she
will at once become the most unpopular woman in Rhodopé. The people like
their gambling, and they will not have that stopped, you may be sure;
but they are brave, and they do not like running away. Why, man, it is
the very opportunity for the speech you planned so long ago!’

Prince Petros had risen from his seat, and was pacing up and down the
room excitedly.

‘I see--I see,’ he cried. ‘Yes, it is a splendid idea; it is of the
best. I stand corrected; but would it not be even more telling if I
introduced the Bill myself in her name? As you know, any Bill introduced
by the Crown is carried.’

‘But we do not want the Bill to be carried,’ said Malakopf. ‘We want it
thrown out by an immense majority. The minority, in fact, I expect will
consist of yourself.’

But the Prince’s suggestion had more in it than Malakopf perceived at
once, and than the Prince perceived at all. Any Bill--such was the
autocratic law of Rhodopé--introduced by the Crown passed into law. The
privilege had rarely been used, and this prerogative was practically
obsolete; but there could be no doubt, as the Prince said, that the
Crown was constitutionally within its rights in so acting. Thus, if
Prince Petros introduced the Bill in the Princess’s name, and stuck to
it, it could only fail to become law by a reconstitution of the power of
the Crown--in other words, by a revolution. In this way Malakopf would
be rid not only of the Princess, but also of the Prince, who, despite
his speech against it, would have voted for it. This formed part of his
original, but at present undetailed, programme, and he was fairly
astounded at the fitness of his opportunity. He could kill both with one
stone. So, after a moment, he corrected himself.

‘But I am not sure,’ he said, ‘that you are not right after all. Perhaps
yours is the simpler plan, for it makes a revolution inevitable. I will
think it over. Meanwhile, may I ask for a whisky-and-soda? The night is
hot for this time of the year.’

The two were sitting on the great north veranda of the Palace. The air
was exquisitely fresh, with an easterly breeze, though still, as
Malakopf had said, warm for October. But a divine mellowness is over
October in Rhodopé, the sky is a perfect turquoise from sunrise to
sunset, and to sunrise again an inimitable sapphire. The French season
at its height, and a band from the Casino gardens close by made the
night an echo of the brain of Weber. The moon, swung full south, cast a
great square of shadow from the Palace over the garden, and the metallic
tinkle of the water from the bronze Triton fountain falling into its
basin came from the darkness. Beyond, a balustrade of Pentelic marble
bounded the headlong cliff below, and in the hollow beneath the lamps of
Amandos twinkled innumerably. On the great range of Balkan peaks to the
north the earliest snow of the year had already fallen, and the giants
of the range were silver spearheads charging the sky. To the west,
twelve miles away, the lights of Mavromáti, low on the horizon and small
as a glow-worm, were more like a reflection of stars than an authentic
constellation. But from minute to minute a luminous pencil of colour,
now scarlet, now red, now yellow, shot with penetrating clearness across
the land, and even dyed the white Palace walls for a moment in its
passage, marking the rotation of the harbour lights. The murmur of busy
folk buzzed like the swarming of bees from the town, and now and again a
sudden shriller note betokened some infinitesimal excitement of the
street.

But the perfection of the Southern night roused no echo in the heart of
Petros; his thoughts were intent on himself. Little he recked of the
ebony shadows, the white fields of moonshine, the beauty of the muffled
sounds of the night, and in so far as they reached him, they reached
him only by the sense of lordship. Soon, he thought, would the
polychrome light from Mavromáti be his; his, too, would be the cicala
that sang in the bushes; his the luminous evidence of mankind that shone
from the lights of Amandos. For his outlook was but puny; nothing was
great if it was not his, nothing was beautiful unless it owned his
supremacy. Nor was Malakopf more poetically-minded: the spearheads of
the Balkan were only interesting because the map of Europe traced across
that untracked whiteness the boundaries of Rhodopé; the strains of Weber
that came from the club gardens were only beautiful because he had
invested a large sum of money in the Casino, and music was an attraction
to the visitors. Once President of this Republic of Rhodopé, he would
have willingly driven the snow-plough across the Balkans to mark the
limits of his Presidency, if thereby he could add an acre to its
mileage, and painted the country magenta to correspond with the latest
map.

But though the glory of the Southern night gave him no food for
admiration, the last suggestion of the Prince was worth the expenditure
of brain tissue, and the more he considered it, the more suitable did
the Prince’s unwitting scheme appear. It would be necessary, it is true,
to alter the proposed chronology of events, and reserve for the last
meeting of the Assembly before the Christmas holiday the introduction of
the new Bill. The House should not be asked to vote on that day; the
Bill alone should be read, and notice given that the voting would take
place immediately before the prorogation on December 31.

The thought of the scene which would take place on that day almost
dazzled him. The Assembly at Rhodopé had never been, since he had known
it first, a House of melodrama. But on December 31 the scene would
surely beggar the Adelphi Theatre, London. From the throne the Prince
would make a regretful, and no doubt a very foolish, speech on this Bill
for abolishing all gambling within the principality, and since he, as
Sophia’s representative, introduced the Bill, the Assembly would, on
precedent and constitution, record indeed their votes, but, however the
voting went, would be compelled to accept it. But he knew them very
little if such was the event. In his speech the Prince would, as
Malakopf had planned the scene, be forced to support the wishes and the
commands of his wife. She, so he would say, had intended to introduce
the Bill herself, but had been unable to face the situation, and had
left the doing of it to him. All her subjects knew that she had opened
the club herself, knew also the assiduity with which she attended its
sessions. With what face now was she to order its abolition, when the
institution had taken such deep hold on her people? But her purpose was
irrevocably fixed. Abolished it should be, and she claimed (through her
husband) the ancient right of the Crown. For a week past there would
have been but one subject for talk in the principality; indignation
would have flared like a bonfire since the Bill had been introduced.
Half Rhodopé spent rapturous evenings in the Casino; they would not
lightly give them up. But the Prince, as primed by Malakopf, would speak
with strength and conviction. He would commit himself hopelessly to a
policy of loyalty to his wife. His position (he would say) was most
trying, but he was bound by every code of honour to support without
reservation her whom he represented. Such were her commands. The Bill
was introduced by the Crown; let them vote if they pleased; the measure
became law.

Malakopf’s eye glowed. He saw himself rise before the assembled House,
and to the Prince’s dumb and infinite dismay, oppose the Bill. Such a
course, he knew, was without shadow of precedent. He would adopt it
without attempt at excuse. He would denounce the Princess. As they all
knew, she spent her holidays at Monte Carlo--much needed holidays,
indeed! She was worn out, was she not, with the prosecution of State
affairs! His brother ministers knew how wide and numerous were the yawns
with which she honoured their audiences. The Bill could not become law;
simply it was one of the things that did not happen. Yet it must become
law unless they took a line of their own. On his part, he begged to move
that the question of the Bill before the House be postponed a moment,
for he had another proposal to make. The House (so he told himself in
these imaginings) would vote on the postponement of the Bill for the
abolition of gambling; the House would carry it. Then he would propose
nothing short of a revolution, the dethronement of the line of Ægina,
who, in the person of the Princess, sought to curtail the inalienable
right of gambling inaugurated by herself. In this, and in no other way,
could liberty be secured them.

But it was far better that the Bill, if such was to be his policy,
should be introduced just before the Christmas vacation, and that no
voting should take place till the last day of December, to give a whole
week for the fermentation of righteous wrath to come to a head. And it
would not be a bad thing to let a hint of what was coming be in the air,
to let the free spirit of the citizens chafe at the thought of so
grievous a curtailment of their liberties, to let Distrust flap its
obscene wings about the streets. Again his own investment in the club
itself had turned out most profitable, for the half-year’s dividend had
been declared at 20 per cent. This, too, he had no mind to lose.

By the beginning of December it was already a matter for street-corner
gossip as to whether there was any truth in this extraordinary report
that the Princess Sophia would introduce by the mouth of her husband a
Bill for the abolition of gambling. To most the thing seemed scarcely
credible, and the more loyal of her subjects flatly refused to entertain
so preposterous a suggestion. It was inconceivable that the queen of
gamblers should attempt to deprive her subjects of the right to indulge
in her own favourite pursuit, and it was bitter to contemplate her at
Monte Carlo directing from the St. Peter’s of the goddess the closing of
this remote little chapel. Others, who pretended to more authentic
information, declared that she was acting under the persuasion of the
Prince, who, as it was well known, did not frequent the club, and though
he had invested in it, rather disapproved of it than otherwise. By
degrees this view of the question obtained a following, and as it grew
by so much the popularity of the Prince waned and the delight of
Malakopf waxed. Petros had never been seen at the club since his wife’s
departure, and this alone was sufficient to raise a prejudice against
him. The air was full of disquietude, which increased as the days went
on.

This disquietude was only not shared by Malakopf; indeed, the Fates
seemed to be propitious for him. Sophia away, the odium of the proposed
change gradually attaching to the Prince--no combination of
circumstances could have been luckier. The exact execution of his great
stroke must be largely left for the future to decide, but at present
things were working out just as he desired. He was studious to keep the
Prince unaware, as far as might be, of the growing feeling against him,
for fear he might turn craven at the end, and not give him his full
opportunity.

Meantime Lady Blanche kept an eager eye on the development of the
situation, and noted every chop and change of popular feeling. She had
already telegraphed to Sophia the rumour of the Bill, advising her to
leave Monte Carlo instantly, so as to be nearer at hand, in case of any
precipitation of events. The Princess had telegraphed back that she was
on the point of leaving, and said that her next address would be at the
Empress’ Villa in Corfu, where she would be known to the postal
authorities as the Countess of Ægina. As there was plenty of time for a
letter to reach her before her arrival, Lady Blanche wrote to her at
length, describing the exact condition of affairs, and recommending her
to keep steam up on her yacht, since there was no knowing when the
crisis would come. It seemed probable, however, as it was now definitely
announced that the Bill would be introduced on the day before the
Christmas vacation, but that no voting would take place then, nor any
speech from Prince Petros, that the last day of December was the date
determined by the two conspirators for their grand _coup_.

The Bill was to be read, so Malakopf and Prince Petros had planned it,
immediately before the adjournment of the House for the Christmas
vacation. After reading it, the Prince would simply give notice that the
voting on the Bill would take place on December 31, after which the
House would rise. He would then return straight to the Palace, and as
far as possible, so Malakopf advised, keep there till the day for the
debate came on. There was sure to be a considerable public excitement,
and the Prince’s speech, in which he would tell them that his wife had
strictly laid on him the communication of this calamitous and
regrettable resolution, would come with redoubled force if he had been
known to have shut himself up under the painful stress of his feelings.

The day for the reading of the Bill arrived, and the House was packed.
The business of the day was transacted with immense indifference and
rapidity, and when it was finished a dead dense silence fell on the
Assembly. Then Prince Petros rose from the throne, and stepped forward
to the edge of the little platform, where sat the monarch and the
Ministers.

‘Gentlemen,’ he said, ‘Her Royal Highness the Princess Sophia has bid me
read to you the text of a Bill she introduces through me. On this Bill I
shall myself speak on December the thirty-first, immediately before the
rising of the House. To-day I shall simply read the text of it to you,
and the House will then, without comment or debate, rise for the
Christmas vacation. How much I regret----’ he began, then stopped, and
read the following:

     ‘“That all gambling-houses in the realm of Rhodopé of every sort
     and degree, private or public, be closed, and that no game of
     hazard be henceforward played therein.

     ‘“That to play any such game in public, or to bet in public, be a
     felony.

     ‘“That licenses shall be withdrawn from every licensed
     gambling-house in the aforementioned realm of Rhodopé.

     ‘“That the building known as the club be converted into an asylum
     for decayed and idiotic old gentlemen, the purpose for which the
     ground was originally intended.

     ‘“That the person known as Pierre be sent back to Monte Carlo, his
     passage (second-class) paid.

     ‘“That these regulations come into effect on the first day of
     January (new style), 1857.

                             ‘“SOPHIA,
                    ‘“_Hereditary Princess of Rhodopé_.”’



Dead silence followed; and the Prince, commanding his voice with
difficulty, adjourned the House, bowed to the deputies, and retired
through the private door which led to the steps communicating with the
Palace gardens.

Copies of the Bill were laid on the table in the House, and each Member
took one (these papers now fetch a high price among collectors of
curios); one also was brought to the British Legation, and Lady Blanche,
coming in from her ride just before dinner, saw and read it. The next
moment a frenzied Amazon figure sped up the stairs, and ten minutes
afterwards a telegram in cipher was handed to the Secretary, who was
writing in the Chancery. It was addressed to the Countess of Ægina, care
of the Empress of Austria, Corfu. Blanche had grasped the situation in
its completeness. She saw that the _grand coup_ was to be played on
December 31, and that till then it was better that Princess Sophia
should not be in Rhodopé. In a talk the two had had together, they had
decided that the Princess’s appearance had best be sudden, like a
lightning stroke, that in the very moment of the crisis she should again
be with them, not to nip the bud, but to cull the flower of full-blown
conspiracy.

Consequently her telegram ran:

     ‘Be in Amandos secretly on the afternoon of the thirty-first; the
     House assembles at half-past three. I will meet you at Mavromáti.
     For safety change the name of the _Felatrune_. Telegraph to me the
     changed name.’

Late that night a telegram was handed in at the Legation, addressed to
Lady Blanche. It contained one word:

     ‘Revenge.’




CHAPTER IX.

THE PRINCESS RETURNS.


For the next ten days Rhodopé was a pandemonium of conflicting theory,
and no half-dozen folk could agree as to the authorship of this
incredible Bill. Some said that Sophia had gone mad, and was no longer
fit to be the ruler of the country; some that Petros had tamed her
haughty spirit, and that she was wax in his hands; some that things
would explain themselves on the 31st. But all these divergent lines
pulled to one resultant: it was impossible that the Bill should become
law. It was a universally-allowed truth that, if the Bill was voted on,
it must be opposed, and that the voice of the people must challenge the
command of the Crown. Would Sophia accept such an affront? If she did
accept it, what would follow? If she did not accept it, what would
follow? The old Constitution in any case could not stand, and at this
conclusion men bit their nails, and wondered what the new Constitution
would be.

But there was yet another party--the ‘Extreme Loyalists,’ as they were
ironically termed--who were faithful to Sophia. They were few in
number, but fanatically sure of their own orthodoxy. There must be, they
said, another explanation; it was not within the bounds of possibility
that Sophia had originated this scheme, or was in any way responsible
for its execution. These, when asked for any explanation that could hold
water, would not commit themselves; some silently held Malakopf
responsible, some Prince Petros; others, who had seen the wife of the
Mayor of Amandos lose a hundred francs with a very bad grace at the
tables, were ready to affirm that she, being born from princely blood,
had secret schemes on the throne of Rhodopé. This last explanation was
considered to be in indifferent taste; men did not just now desire jokes
about the future of the monarchy.

But no crisis of feverish excitement could stay the passage of hours.
Christmas Day, with its sequence of festas, was a mockery of merriment,
and still there came no sign from those in authority, no word that could
in any way allay the rising fever of the people. More than once crowds
collected outside the Palace, and shouted for Prince Petros to speak to
them. Once he appeared at the window and bowed to them, but shook his
head, and those who saw him said he was pale and haggard and unshaved,
and the mob dispersed in silence, feeling that perhaps there was a
deeper tragedy than they knew. How unlike his gay and gallant figure was
that mournful, dishevelled apparition! They would have been even more
puzzled if they had been able to see him a moment after turn to
Malakopf, who was sitting with him, and ask with a sprightly air,
‘Didn’t I do that well?’

Up till the 28th the serenity of the weather corresponded but ill with
the tempest of the political outlook, but on that morning it seemed that
even the elements were drawn into the vortex of the storm. A morning of
sultry and unseasonable heat, thick like a blanket, ushered in a wailing
wind from the east, but in some higher current of the air a rack of
thunder-clouds, black and ominous, stole up from behind Corfu, and
before evening had spread slowly and impenetrably over the sky. The heat
of the morning had given place to a bitter and freezing cold, a cold
which pierced the marrow and congealed the vital forces. But the east
wind had dropped, and, a portent to behold, flash after flash of remote
lightning lit up the gathering darkness of an Arctic night. About
midnight the storm burst in a blinding hurricane of sleet and snow, and
all the artillery of heaven thundered above it. At Amandos snow was as
much a foreigner as thunder; often in summer the great hilltops round
were cloaked in thunder-clouds or smouldered with lightning, yet no
cloud obscured the brightness of the heaven from the valley. Again, in
winter these same hilltops wore white mantles for four months, yet a
genial sun, bright and invigorating, shone ever on the town. To lie
beneath this double portent was an ominous thing, and the people, tuned
to superstition by their new education at the tables, shook their heads,
and prophesied a revolution of elements more intimate to them than snow
or thunder.

An even livelier disquietude possessed Lady Blanche. The morning of the
29th it were an abuse of language to call a morning at all. The
darkness, peopled by nothing but snowflakes and the maddened scream of
the wind, seemed more palpable by the faint, sick glimmer of the day
than it had been at night. All the forenoon the hurricane waxed ever
fiercer, and, like drums, it was possible to hear, amid the shrill
clamour of the wind, the booming of the great surges driven on the Cape
of Mavromáti, a dozen miles away. Lady Blanche determined to telegraph
to the Princess that should leave Corfu at once, even anticipating her
arrival by a day rather than risk the danger of arriving an hour too
late; but her fears were irremediable, the telegraph-wires to Mavromáti
were down, Amandos was cut off from all the world.

Then she would have sent a messenger to Mavromáti with her message, but
that too was impossible. Who could hope to pass alive through the forest
in which the road lay, where the pines were falling like ninepins and
snapping under the snow like matches? Noon came, unmarked except by the
clock, and her anxiety grew irrepressible. Outside the Legation windows
lay the square of the town, which had been so gay for Sophia’s wedding;
to-day it might have been a rural scene in Spitzbergen, so completely
had the snow denuded it of its evidences of civilization. A desert of
white drifts was all her view; one could scarce believe that a row of
houses ran north and south from their door, that a hundred yards away
rose the cathedral, or that fifty paces to the left were the steps of
the Assembly, which in two days would meet--for what? Yet it was
necessary, no less, that Princess Sophia should be here in forty-eight
hours, and it was this problem of how it was possible that she should
get here that Blanche, crushing her temples in her hands, set herself to
solve.

She must get here, so much was certain; that, at any rate, was a fixed
point in this awful vagueness. The Adriatic boomed its shipwrecking
denial; twelve miles of tree-strewn, snow-drifted forest lay between
Mavromáti and Amandos. How, how, and yet again, how?

Of the Princess’s courage to face, if need be, the final storm, the
trumpet of the Archangel, Blanche had no doubt. Yet what sane skipper
would put to sea in such a madness of the heavens? A telegram must be
sent to tell Sophia that all the powers of hell must not hinder her
return. The telegram had to be sent. Who could be trusted to go to
Mavromáti, and not turn back, saying that the mission was beyond all
possibility? Instantly the solution struck her--she would go herself.
Lord Abbotsworthy dozing after lunch; she broke in on his slumbers.

‘Oh, father,’ she said, ‘there is not time to explain, but take my word
for it. Unless Sophia--unless the Princess--is here before that forged
Bill of hers comes before the House on the thirty-first, she is no more
Princess of Rhodopé. She, her line, her country, are at stake. She is at
Corfu--ah! do not ask me how I know, but I know she is--with the
Empress, ready to return. Come she must.’

Lord Abbotsworthy held up a listening hand.

‘Boom! boom!’ he said; ‘that is the Adriatic. But you are so unexpected,
Blanche. Dear me, how sleepy I am! Princess Sophia may be at Corfu, or
the Falkland Islands; it is all one. Why should she come? In any case,
she cannot.’

The Minister was still struggling with the drowsiness that snow brings,
and regarded Blanche’s voice more as the imaginings of a political
nightmare than the tones of his child.

‘Oh, you don’t understand!’ she cried. ‘But I know all about this wicked
Bill. It is an invention of Malakopf and that husband of Sophia’s. I am
in communication with the Princess. Well, the wires are down between
here and Mavromáti, and I am going there to tell her to come back at
once.’

Lord Abbotsworthy was by this time sufficiently awake to understand that
Blanche was in earnest.

‘My dear child, you can’t go,’ he said. ‘But a man might get through.
Shall I telegraph to the Foreign Office? Oh, I forget, the wires are
down.’

He rose and went to the window.

‘It is impossible,’ he said; ‘the drifts will be deeper than a man’s
height through the forests.’

‘I know,’ said Blanche, ‘but one could follow the river till one came
out on to the lower plain. There will probably be less snow there. And
I must go myself. I must see Sophia before she comes to Amandos; it is
her crown to her.’

Lord Abbotsworthy looked at Blanche approvingly. His diplomatic calm
never left him.

‘You are not the first woman of your race who has shown a man’s pluck,’
he said. ‘Well, you shall have your way. There is a bridle-path by the
river, is there not? Take two men with you--Yanni, and the English
groom, who will see to the horses. Yanni can find his way anywhere, even
at Waterloo Junction. Meantime, Blanche, if this is likely to be a
question of an hour or two losing or winning everything, I will send out
some men to clear the path for the Princess’s return. I take your word
for the whole matter, and I will not delay you by asking questions. I
assume that I can do nothing, or else you would have told me what I
could do.’

‘Oh, father, that is good of you!’ she cried. ‘Let them do all they can
to make the carriage-road passable by Wednesday morning; one can go
quicker that way. I will send for Yanni.’

In half an hour they were off. Lord Abbotsworthy’s head-keeper, a shrewd
greyhound of an Albanian, who knew the forests as a man knows his house,
had said that it would be possible to make a way along the bridle-path
by the river, thus avoiding the delay and danger of falling or fallen
trees, and the groom took the order with the bland imperturbability of
an English servant. They had each a horse, or rather a sturdy mountain
cob, animals more surefooted than a cat, wise, strong, and steady. They
left the Legation by the stable-gate, so as to avoid the possibility of
being seen by anyone from the houses in the square, and in a moment the
white tumult of the driven snow had swallowed them up.

The confusion of the elements was incredible; the snow, driven almost
horizontally by the wind, was more like a solid sheet than an infinity
of flakes. Beneath the shelter of houses, they made their way quickly
out of the town, though not without danger, for the tiles on the
windward side of the roofs, where the snow could not lie, were starting
up like disturbed game, and would be shot with a rattle half-way across
the street, burying themselves with a silent plunge in the snow, and
once half a chimney fell not three yards in front of Blanche.

It was not till they left the last houses behind that they realized the
full uproar of the heavens, and in ten minutes, for all that could be
seen, they might have been at Amandos or Mavromáti. They could discern
nothing, except a few yards of white ground on each side; they passed
lumps and hummocks of snow to the right hand and the left, which might
have been houses, or buried flocks of sheep, or hedgerows. But Yanni,
with the aid of a compass and a long pole, which from time to time he
thrust forward beyond his pony to guard against slipping into a drift,
led them cannily on. In an hour or so they could tell he was on the
right track, for the ground began rapidly to decline, and on their left
they passed from time to time a fallen tree, or a group of
wind-tormented pines, which must be the outliers of the forest. Soon the
screaming of the wind was overscored by a hoarser note, and in ten
minutes more they came down to the river, yellow and swollen beyond
recognition, a furlong breadth of maddened foam, peopled with trees,
house-beams, débris of huts and now and then some dead animal--sheep,
pig, or goat--all twisting and whirling down with a ghastly sort of
gaiety in a veritable dance of death.

A steep bank of snow led to the river-side, on which lay the bridle-path
they must now find and follow, and Yanni dismounted to probe about for
it. Once he slipped up to the neck in a drift, and when Blanche and the
groom dragged him out, he shook his head in grave self-reproof.

‘I doubt my mother bore a fool,’ he said.

But before long they found it, and once found, it was easily possible to
follow the path, for it lay notably level on that hillside of snow.

About four of the afternoon, when the faint glimmer of day was turning
into a more palpable darkness, a change, at first hardly perceptible,
began to come over the tumult of the weather. The wind blew only in
sudden squalls and sonorous gusts, with intervals of quiet; the falling
snow grew thinner and finer, and though they were rapidly descending,
the cold grew more exquisite and piercing. The ponies’ feet, instead of
plunging noiselessly into the fallen stuff, made each step through a
crisp upper crust of frozen snow. By five the sky was clear and the
wind dead, and an innumerable host of large and frosty stars began to
glimmer like half-lit lamps in a vault of velvet. As the intenser
darkness of night came on they burned ever more luminously, and every
foot of the country, lying white polished and shining, caught and
reflected their brightness. Eastwards the sky was gray with the approach
of moonrise, and even before the full circle topped the hills to the
east, it was as if day but now succeeded to night rather than night to
day.

Before seven they had joined the main-road from Mavromáti below and
beyond the intervening forest. The air was of an exceeding clearness,
and crisp with frost, and not five miles away twinkled the lights of the
port, and the various fingers of the lighthouse. Behind them, a black
blot in the moonlight, rose the forest, shoulder over shoulder; to their
right brawled the swollen stream, but all was as still and as frozen as
an Arctic day.

Not till then, when, morally speaking, their journey was over, did Lady
Blanche realize how acute her anxiety had been.

‘Oh, William!’ she exclaimed to the groom, with a sudden,
half-hysterical laugh, ‘we shall soon be there.’

‘Yes, my lady,’ replied that iron-faced functionary, and he brushed a
little frill of icicles from his hair and eyebrows.

The night was windless and deadly cold, but the beauty of it was beyond
compare. On all sides stretched acre on acre of frozen snow, rounded
and billowy, but every outline was etched with the crispness of the
frost. The sound of their ponies’ going was like a biting of toast;
other noise there was none, except the crashing thunder of the broken
surges on the shore. As they drew nearer, these ever became the more
stupendous, till the ear was filled with their booming, as with the roar
of a train in a tunnel. Soon it was possible to detect above the
increasing riot the scream of the pebbly beach continually dragged down
to the jaws of one wave, only to be vomited up afresh by the next, and
her anxieties again began to lie heavy on Lady Blanche. Her part was
done; in another hour the telegraph would twitch her message across to
Corfu; but how would it be possible for any yacht to win through those
mountainous billows? Down on the sea-board the snowfall had been less
deep, and before eight they had entered the streets, all dumb and
silent, and the telegram summoning Sophia at once had been despatched.

Early on the morning of the 30th came the Princess’s reply. ‘I am just
going on board. We start at once. It will be rather rough,’ it said, and
no more; and all that day Blanche watched in a fever of impatience for a
sight of the newly-christened _Revenge_. In fair weather it was a
crossing of not more than six hours, but who could say how many in such
a sea? She consulted with Yanni as to the possible means of return to
Amandos, for this frost would render the road impassable to carriages,
however zealous had been the work of the men Lord Abbotsworthy had sent
out, and he said that riding was the only mode of passage. Lady Blanche
was seated at her window in the sitting-room of the Hôtel Royal while
the old keeper talked to her, and looking out idly into the street, she
saw two children playing together on the frozen and compacted snow. One
had a board, to which he had tied a string; the other sat on it, and was
easily pulled along. Suddenly she applied the suggestion, and with
dismay at her own stupidity.

‘Oh, Yanni!’ she cried, ‘I am a fool, and you another! A sledge!’

But a sledge was an unknown conveyance in Rhodopé, and Blanche hired a
light cart. She had the wheels taken off, and two wooden runners, shod
with steel, fitted on to its springs. The superintendence of this
carpentering served to fill in the hours of that awful day of waiting;
but when night fell there was still no signal of a ship. The wind had
again risen to hurricane force, maddening still more the maddened sea,
and a threat of a further fall of snow was abroad. The stars in their
courses seemed to fight against Sophia.

The meeting of the Assembly was fixed for half-past three the next
afternoon. Allowing for a long speech from Prince Petros, and the
possibility of opposition contrary to the Constitution of Rhodopé, by
six o’clock to-morrow afternoon at latest Sophia must be at Amandos. How
she would choose to act Blanche could not guess, but that she was
content to leave to the Princess. Her part was to get Sophia there.
Outside the note of the gale would rise and fall again octave over
octave, like the hootings of some infernal siren, but as yet there was
neither more snow nor thaw. But the crash of the breakers grew ever
hungrier and more splitting, and still the _Revenge_ came not.

She could not bring herself to go to bed, but sat listening in a
horrible dread for she scarcely knew what. But when across the mingled
bellowings of the storm she heard a gun fired out at sea, she sprang up
with a palpitating heart and a gasp for breath, knowing that it was this
which she had feared. Running to the window, she saw a rocket shoot up
in a line of flame, like a match struck in the dark, and a minute
afterwards the report of it followed. She rang the bell hastily and told
Yanni to come with her along the pier out to the lighthouse at the end.

It was now only a little before midnight, and the moon plunged and sped
through a rack of flying clouds, like a woman distraught, now naked, now
clad in blowing vapours. The wind came straight off the sea, piercingly
cold, and full of spray and blown sand, while over the frozen carpet of
snow in the street wisps of brown seaweed and pebbles from the beach
scudded and bowled along like little people in a panic. On the pier
itself the force of the wind was more tremendous, and they had to make a
slanting tack as they walked, zigzagging to and fro, and leaning against
the gale as against a wall. Once and again the signal of distress came
from the sea, and round the house where the lifeboat was kept they could
see a throng of men growing and increasing, and the light of lanterns
tossed up and down in the stinging air. Then from the sea shot up
another rocket, and a cold blue light burned steadily for some seconds
or so, and in that glare Blanche made out the three masts of a
sailing-ship, and a flood of relief welled in her heart.

‘Oh, thank God!’ she cried, ‘it is not she!’ And next moment ‘Oh, poor
folk! poor folk!’ she said; and Yanni crossed himself and muttered a
prayer for their safety.

There was a coastguard station at the end of the pier, and she asked for
the officer in command, giving her name, and saying that a steamer
called the _Revenge_ was expected, which had on board some friends of
Lord Abbotsworthy. It had started from Corfu early that morning. Then,
remembering that no communication with Amandos was possible, and that
though the men would, in case of the necessity for rescue, do their
best, though there were only a crew of the hated Turks on board--yet the
knowledge that Sophia was there could not but be an incentive to
heroisms--she told all.

‘Captain Hatsopoulo,’ she said, ‘the _Revenge_ is none other than the
_Felatrune_. Princess Sophia is on board, and little Prince Leonard; the
whole hopes of the House of Ægina are there. There is a foul plot
against her--this Bill, in fact, which you may have heard of. I can tell
you no more. But she must be in Amandos to-morrow--she must! she must!
Ah, it is already to-morrow--she must be there this afternoon.’

The ship which had made signals of distress had by now come close into
shore, and already the lifeboat was out. They had quickly got a rope out
to her, for she was already breaking up, and the work of rescue was
going on. Blanche had gone into the house of the coastguard station, for
an inward necessity for being near prevented her from going back to the
hotel, and she sat by the fire in a room they prepared for her, waiting.
In another hour came news that the crew of the vessel had all been
saved, but the ship lost. Not long after this she fell into an uneasy
doze, and dreamed that the kingdom of Rhodopé was a bright little round
thing, like a roulette-marble. She and Sophia had gone out for a walk
together, and Sophia had dropped it, and now she and the Princess were
hunting for it in the snow. Others were hunting for it, too. Gray,
uncanny shapes like wolves trotted incessantly about; some were like
Malakopf, some reminded her of Prince Petros, others had terrible
whiskers and green eyes; others, again, were more in the semblance of
fiends unimaginably horrible, and they all scratched and nosed in the
snow for the little bright marble. Then she slept more deeply, and a
dreamless slumber succeeded to these uneasy visions.

It was already day when she awoke; the faithful Yanni was stretched out
on the floor beside her chair asleep, and it was Captain Hatsopoulo’s
entrance that had roused her. She started at once into the full
possession of her faculties, and sprang up.

‘Ah! I no longer hear the wind,’ she cried. ‘Well, captain, what is it?’

‘The _Revenge_ has been sighted,’ he said. ‘You can see her out of this
window.’

Far out over the waste of tossing water there heaved up and sank again
the masts and bulwarks of a steamer. Captain Hatsopoulo took Blanche to
where the great telescope stood.

‘Watch her as she rises to a wave,’ he said. ‘There! that is none other
than the _Felatrune_. You can see her colours. The Princess is flying
her own flag! God save the Princess!’ he cried.

‘God save her!’ echoed Blanche; ‘and confound the tricks of her
enemies!’

The _Revenge_ was steering an easterly course from Corfu, and about ten
of the morning she came opposite Mavromáti, still some miles out to sea.
They saw her swing this way and that, now labouring low in the trough of
the waves, now poised on the top, and for the next hour watched her
still nearing them, her masts striking wildly right and left across a
space of some ninety degrees, so that it made Blanche feel qualms of
nausea only to see her. On shore, opposite the landing stage where she
would put in, was drawn up the sledge, ready to start at a moment’s
notice; and opposite, on the other side of the harbour, the lifeboat was
launched with its crew, in case she could not make the harbour mouth,
and was driven ashore. The port of Mavromáti faced almost north, and the
gale from the north-west had raised a terrific cross-sea. As she drew
nearer, they could see that she had changed her course a point or two
northwards, to allow space enough so that she should not be carried
against the south pier by the huge billows that swept across the
entrance. Already she had slackened steam, and made almost imperceptible
way towards them. Then came a minute of awful suspense as she moved
close up to the harbour mouth, so perilously near to the wall of broken
water which dashed over the end of the south pier that the spray of it
hid her for a moment; the next she was beyond the breakers, and safe.

Blanche was already half-way across the harbour to meet her, and before
the yacht had come to anchor she was over the side and in Sophia’s arms.

‘Ah, you are not much too soon, dearest Sophia!’ she cried, ‘I have
waited here all night. Quick! come ashore; and the sledge is ready.’

‘Is there room in it for a box?’ she asked. ‘I do not want to appear
before the Assembly in travelling clothes.’

‘Yes, yes, there is room,’ cried the other. ‘You shall dress at the
Legation. Come--only come!’

‘Petros will be surprised to see me,’ remarked the Princess. ‘As we go,
you shall tell me everything.’




CHAPTER X.

THE PRINCESS IS VERY MUCH THERE.


The Parliament House at Amandos, standing next the cathedral in the
square, is but a small building, for its full attendance is only sixty;
but for beauty of proportion and exquisiteness of finish it would be
difficult to name its fellow. Over the main entrance is a carved wooden
gallery, where the friends of Members can attend a debate; at the other
a raised platform, on which are the seats for the six Ministers of the
Crown, and the throne itself. These are near the wall, and close behind
the throne is the small door which communicates with the Princess’s
private way into the Palace. Three steps lead up from the floor of the
House on to the platform, which is faced by a low bronze balustrade of
dolphins, and foliage, and mermaids. It is the custom for any Minister
who wishes to address the House on the debate to take his place not on
the platform, but on the Ministerial front bench. Similarly the monarch,
if contributing to the debate, sits as the first of his own Ministers.
The custom is an ancient one, and certainly signifies that while
appealing to the House, and arguing for or against a question, all are
equal as Members of that House, and carry no official rank.

The seats of the Members are arranged in two rows on each side of the
gangway of the House, which is paved in variously coloured marbles from
Búlteck. The most exquisite patterns in red, green, and yellow adorn it,
and in the centre, in lapis lazuli, jasper, and white marble, are
wrought the crown and royal arms of Rhodopé. Behind the Members’ seats
on each side stand the busts of the Princes of Rhodopé, an unbroken line
dating from the time of Constantine, first Prince of the House of Ægina.
This is one of the finest of the series, and is by Desiderio da
Settignano, one of Donatello’s few pupils. The seats of the Members are
great oak armchairs in scarlet brocade, and the walls are covered with
old oak woodwork of the fifteenth century.

But the marvel of the place is the throne; it is made throughout of
ivory, a panel of gold brocade is let into the back, and the cushion of
the seat is covered with the same. Two gold lions support the arms, and
back, arms, and front are thickly incrusted with precious stones, and
goldsmith’s work attributed to Benvenuto Cellini. The footstool is
likewise of ivory, and gold brocade covers the tread of it. The whole is
set on four steps, the first of which is covered with a thick facing of
white Arabian agate, the second with jasper, the third with cornelian,
and the fourth with chalcedony. Thus, though it stands far back from
the House, the whole of it, owing to its elevation, is clearly seen over
the low bronze balustrade of the platform.

The morning of December 31 dawned clear and light after the tempest of
the two days before, but an ominous stillness, like the hush before a
storm, hung over the town. None was bold enough to forecast the probable
issue of events--none, indeed, knew exactly what was happening. Those
who refused to believe that Sophia was responsible for this crisis were
already in the large majority, but as it was thought that she was in
England, nothing but a telegram from her--unless, indeed, she was still
ignorant of what was taking place--could within the bounds of
possibility save the situation. That this preposterous Bill could be
carried was not worth consideration; it was not even known whether
Prince Petros would vote for it. None knew what manner of communication
he would make. It was hinted that he would merely mention that it was
introduced by the Sovereign, and thus would become law, others thought
he might go so far as to disclaim all share in it, and even express
sympathy with the nation. Some, as has been already mentioned, saw in
him the first cause of it, and were wildly indignant against him;
others, again, affirmed that none were so indignant as himself, and that
he regarded the fall of Sophia as inevitable, and not unjust. What line
the present Government would take, what form the future Government would
assume, none knew. There was, however, certainly a considerable party
which would gladly have seen Petros on the throne, if Sophia really
intended to commit this wild and obstinate mistake; others, it was
supposed, were Republicans in tendency, and pointed silently to Malakopf
as the President of the Republic. One thing only, in the midst of this
feverish uncertainty, was sure--the Bill could not become law.

The debate was fixed for half-past three, but long before that time the
gallery of the House was filled to overflowing with eager eyes, and
every Member, chilly and apprehensive, was in his seat. All the
Ministers were in the body of the House, indicating that all meant to
take part in the debate. This by itself was ominous enough, for it
showed that there would be a debate on a Bill introduced by the Crown, a
fact in itself unique and unprecedented. Prince Petros had not yet
arrived, but the half-hour still tingled in the air from the great
bronze chime of the cathedral, when the private door from the Palace
opened, and he came quickly in. The Members, all wearing levée dress,
remained standing till he had taken his seat on the throne; then, after
a moment’s pause, he took up the paper for the day, and again read out
the text of the inexplicable Bill. It was noticed that he looked pale,
but his voice was steady.

     ‘“That all gambling-houses in the realm of Rhodopé, of every sort
     and degree, private or public, be closed, and that no game of
     hazard be henceforward played therein.

     ‘“That to play any such game in public, or to bet in public, be a
     felony.

     ‘“That licenses shall be withdrawn from every licensed
     gambling-house in the aforementioned realm of Rhodopé.

     ‘“That the building known as the Club be converted into an asylum
     for decayed and idiotic old gentlemen, the purpose for which the
     ground was originally intended.

     ‘“That the person known as Pierre be sent back to Monte Carlo, his
     passage (second class) paid.

     ‘“That these regulations come into effect on the first day of
     January (new style), 1857.

                             ‘“SOPHIA,
                    ‘“_Hereditary Princess of Rhodopé_.”’

In dead silence he read, in dead silence he put down the paper on the
little ivory table by the throne, and walked to the seat reserved for
the monarch, if he should take part in the debate, as the first of his
Ministers. His step did not falter, he neither hurried nor hung back,
and after a pause of a moment or two, in which the House waited in dead
silence, he took a little sheaf of papers from his pocket, and, rising
to his feet, turned his back on the throne so as to face the Members,
and spoke.

‘Gentlemen,’ he said, ‘you have heard in silence and in dismay the
communication I have read you from the throne. With what dismay I read
it I cannot hope to picture to you. It is an anomaly that any speech
should be made on a Bill introduced by the Crown except by the Crown
itself, but I observe that Her Royal Highness’s Ministers have taken
their places in the House. I sympathize with them, and though I suppose
I have the right, as the Princess’s representative, to order that they
go back to their places’--here an angry murmur arose from the
gallery--‘I cannot find it in my heart to do so. I suspend the rule that
no speech should be made but my own. In this I trust I am not disloyal
to my beloved wife, whom I represent. I really cannot feel clear how she
would act. I must use my judgment.

‘I do not know what manner of speech you expect from me,’ he continued.
‘Indeed, I scarcely know what to say, and yet I must tell you what is in
my heart. At least I may claim your pity, for no man, I think, was ever
in so terrible a position. Every word of that Bill was bitter to me,
for, indeed--you hear my voice for the last time--the people of Rhodopé
are very dear to me. But dearer is my love for my wife’--here his voice
rose a little--‘the Princess Sophia, and dearer the little rag of
loyalty which I can still keep, which nothing--no iron chains of
circumstance, no monstrous necessity--can strip from me.’

The last words vibrated with intensest passion; they seemed instinct
with truth and loyalty. The man was a great orator. He paused a moment,
and went on more calmly:

‘But in justice to myself, though you shall all see which way my
conscience commands me to vote as the representative of Her Royal
Highness--in justice to myself, I must say a few words of exculpation.
Believe me, I am altogether innocent of this stupendous error. Not one
word have I exchanged with the Princess Sophia on this matter; she never
consulted me on it, and perhaps wisely, for she must have known what I
should feel. It is scarcely six months ago that she in person
inaugurated the club, in the formation and execution of which I may,
without boasting, claim no inconsiderable share. That club, so I am
happy to think, has poured money like a snow-fed torrent into Rhodopé;
many hundreds of the citizens have shares in it, which yield a
percentage which no gold mine can rival. Indirectly how much more has it
proved to have enriched us! Was not the capital last autumn one hive of
visitors from other countries, bringing not only wealth to us, but an
interchange of ideas, enlarging our horizons, making us feel that we had
brethren from over-sea? And now what? This great building is to be
closed, the visitors will come no more; they will leave our pine breezes
for the languorous air of the Riviera, and we--we shall go back to the
old life. Let me take a few figures to show you just what this means,
dealing only with small items easy to understand. Last year there were
eight restaurants and five hotels in Rhodopé, now there are forty-six
restaurants and seventeen hotels completely open, and far more in course
of construction. This increase is not profitable alone, nor even
principally perhaps, to the enterprise of those who have started them.
The farmer finds a readier market for his sheep, the vine-grower for his
wines; there is not a single trade which has not profited largely by
this. This increased prosperity has filtered through every minutest
channel of our industries. Where sheep only fed on the mountain-side now
resound the cries of the golfers, and the barren land north of Mavromáti
fetches a rental of eighty pounds sterling as a links. Take, again, the
case of the vine-grower. Such is the wonderful fertility of our soil, in
other years we have often sent wine abroad, for the consumption at home
is not equal to the supply. But now what do we see? Our vineyards cannot
keep pace with the demand; we import much from France, from Germany, and
the cheaper hotels, I am told, from California and Australia, and the
duty swells our revenues. From this I hoped that we should advance even
further, that more land would be taken into cultivation, more folk
profitably employed. Alas, and alas, for my dreams!’

The House had been attentive when he began; now, you may say, they hung
on hooks. It had not, at any rate, been expected that the Prince would
express himself so unmistakably. A murmur of sympathetic applause rose
and died and rose again. The tide of popular approval flowed in his
favour; he at least was opposed to this measure. Malakopf alone was
uneasy; he shifted in his seat, his quick brain sought handles in the
Prince’s words, yet from every point he retired baffled. Petros, it is
true, was creating an impression most unfavourable to Sophia. Malakopf
had to do the same for him. The Presidency of the Republic still hung in
the wavering balance.

‘I had hoped otherwise,’ continued Petros. ‘I had hoped to see the
commerce of Europe pour into Rhodopé. Acre on acre of fruitful soil
waits only for the cultivator to say “Sesame!” We are not a tax-ridden
folk like Italy; our country, happier than England, produces more than
unwholesome beer and unpayable corn. We wanted only the impetus to
begin, for we are but at the beginning. The impetus we have had; what
follows? Again Rhodopé will become a sealed land, a land of mountains
and inhospitable ravines to the civilized world, a minor State, an
insignificant Balkan province. Ah----’ and he stopped with a cleverly
taken gulping breath.

Once more a murmur of more audible applause thrilled through the
benches; sympathy seemed on the way to be warmed to boiling-point.
Malakopf signed to the Prince to cease, but the latter took no notice,
and the Prime Minister held himself in readiness to make his attack.

‘Two years ago--more than two years ago,’ continued Petros, speaking
slowly and regretfully, ‘I first set eyes on your incomparable land.
Many daydreams were mine. To the best of my poor ability I have striven
to make them real. I have devoted my time, my powers, such as they
are--but, oh, how gladly!--to contribute to the welfare of the country.
I have had two thoughts only--loyalty to my wife, loyalty to my
land--and now----’

Had the Prince and Malakopf had leisure to observe, they would have
noticed that eyes and attention were no longer glued on them. The people
of Rhodopé, always fond of drama, were having a delightful afternoon. A
more palpable stillness had fallen on the House, and when Petros paused
on the pathetic word, no sympathy thrilled the Assembly. But his great
point was approaching, and it was too imminent for Malakopf to
disregard. The unstable tide was setting too strongly for him not to
interfere, and as he rose the Prince sat down in an assumed humility,
and with a gesture to Malakopf to proceed.

‘I have a question to ask,’ grated out the Prime Minister. ‘The Princess
Sophia is known to be tolerant to gambling, yet now she introduces a
Bill condemning it. She shuts up the club she has opened--on whose
suggestion? We are here in debate, a course unprecedented when the Crown
introduces a Bill. That such a Bill should be opposed is beyond
question, but who is the real author of it? Who but one has persuaded
her to this course? Too long--I say it openly--have we suffered under
the strange whims of the House of Ægina. Princess Sophia, as you all
very well know, spends her days at Monte Carlo, yet she treats us like
children, and would forbid us to gamble in Rhodopé. And has she never
been seen at the tables? And how often is she seen in her place in this
House? Who, after all, is the Prince Petros but the husband of the
gambling Princess? Who, after all, is the Princess herself? Her place is
here among us, but where is she?’ And looking round to face Petros, he
faced also the throne, and his speech froze.

Petros sprang to his feet, determined, like Malakopf, to play his last
card.

‘I, too, am no friend of the House of Ægina,’ he cried, ‘except in so
far as I am the husband of the Princess. We want a ruler who will have
the true interests of the nation at heart; we want----’

And he, too, seeing Malakopf stare open-eyed before him, stopped, then
turned round, for Malakopf’s eyes were fixed not on him, but beyond.

The platform where stood the throne and the official seats of the
Ministers was brilliantly lighted. On each side of the throne were three
seats, untenanted, for the Ministers were all in the body of the House.
On the throne sat Sophia, who had entered through the private door from
the Palace. She was dressed in white brocade; round her neck were four
strings of diamonds, conspicuous among which shone the Eastern gem; on
her head was the great tiara, an heirloom of Rhodopé, and she wore all
her Orders. She sat as still as the throne on which she was seated. She
seemed to listen to the debate, for her head was bent a little forward,
and her mouth was slightly parted, as if she would have something to say
in reply. The sun, low to its setting, shone full on her through the
window above the western door, and she was enveloped in a mantle of
rose. The beauty of her was incomparable.

For a moment there was dead silence when the echo of Petros’s last words
had died in the groining of the roof; then she raised her head a little,
and in a voice of gold, ‘His Highness Prince Petros is addressing the
House, gentlemen,’ she said.

Still dead silence, except for some woman in the gallery, who suddenly
burst into a cackling hysterical laugh.

‘I should like to hear my husband continue his speech,’ she said, when
the woman had stopped laughing.

Malakopf had sat down; Petros alone continued standing. Then Sophia
rose, but the House, still open-mouthed, continued gazing at her. She
drew herself up to her full height.

‘Gentlemen,’ she said; and they rose to their feet.

Without a shade of excitement in her face or hurry in her movement, as
if the subject of the debate were of no concern to her, she walked
across the platform, her train whispering behind her, and down to the
Ministers’ bench. Petros was in the place she would occupy if taking
part in the debate, and not even looking at him, she waved him aside
with her hand.

‘Do not leave the House,’ she said. ‘I have heard your speech; you shall
hear mine.’

Next Petros stood Malakopf, and the Princess swept by him with an air of
ineffable disdain. In her hand she held the Bill Petros had just read
out, and standing in her place she glanced through it, and her face
flushed. Then, ‘Be seated, gentlemen,’ she said.

She still held the Bill in her hand, and when the House had seated
itself she tore and tore it through and through, and again through,
scattered the pieces on the ground, and burst into speech.

‘That for the Bill!’ she said--‘that for the Bill which falsely and
impudently is before the House as my Bill. Before God, I never set eyes
on the thing before, and I think you will read the truth of what I say
if you look at the face of the Prime Minister on my left and on the face
of my husband. It is one of the duties of Royalty to be punctual, and am
I not divinely punctual? Oh, it is incredible!’ she cried--‘it is
incredible that two men could be so infamous and so stupid! And I was to
be the victim of this astounding conspiracy--I! Indeed, gentlemen, I am
not in the humour to be a victim. You heard the Prince’s speech; he
spoke of his loyalty to the interests of the country; he spoke, as I
thought, very convincingly of the benefits the club had brought to our
country; but above all, to cap his insolence, he spoke of his loyalty to
me. Did a man ever hear the equal of that? Oh, Petros, you are
unapproachable!’ and she looked at him for the first time.

Then she turned to Malakopf: ‘You spoke of the strange whims of the
House of Ægina,’ she said. ‘The strangest of all their whims was on the
day that you were made Prime Minister. I heard you ask, “Who, after
all, is the Princess Sophia?” I, after all, am the Princess Sophia!
“Where is the Princess Sophia?” you asked. Malakopf, I am here. In the
name of my ancestors!’ she cried, pointing to the row of busts--‘in the
name of my ancestors, Alexis Malakopf, I thank you for your loyalty to
my House!’

Then, turning to the Chief Justice, ‘I impeach both these men on a
charge of high treason against myself, Sophia, hereditary Princess of
Rhodopé. Let them be removed from the House; they await their trial.’

They were removed in custody, and till they had vanished there was
absolute silence in the House. Then Sophia rose again.

‘I intend,’ she said, ‘to make no further inquiry into this prodigiously
futile attempt against the throne. Indeed, it is difficult to take such
folly seriously, and were I not a little angry I should laugh. If any
present was associated with that dismal couple we have seen leave the
House, it is a matter for himself alone, and let him thank his Maker
that I heard no more speeches on the subject. This Bill, not being
introduced by me, falls to the ground. And now, gentlemen, for a
pleasanter task. I am here according to immemorial custom to thank my
Ministers and the Members of this House for the services they have
rendered to me and to my country during this past year. We have seen the
revenues increase and multiply during the last eight months; never, I
think, has Rhodopé been in so prosperous a condition. I thank you,
gentlemen, from my heart for your services.’

She curtsied right and left to the members of the Assembly, and then
stood a moment silent.

‘One thing more only,’ she said. ‘The customary New Year fêtes will take
place as usual, and Prince Petros’s list of invitations is mine.
Gentlemen, the House is prorogued.’

Flesh and blood could stand it no longer; Sophia’s appearance at such a
moment, the magnificence of her beauty, her royalty of demeanour, would
have made a man dumb from his birth to shout. The Minister of the
Interior leaped on to his brocaded chair like a schoolboy, and the Chief
Justice, being stout, mounted on to his as if it had been a horse.

‘Three cheers, and another and another, for the beloved Princess
Sophia!’ he cried, waving his three-cornered hat.

The scene was indecorous in the extreme. Some jumped on to their chairs,
others on to the table; they pounded the ground with sticks and stamped
and yelled. The chair of the Chief Justice collapsed under him, but
those near said he continued cheering even at the moment his head came
into sharp collision with the marble floor. The gallery was one open
mouth, roaring. It had already got about the town that the Princess had
come back, and when she appeared at the main door leading into the
square, where her carriage was waiting for her, a sea of faces met her.
As the door was opened the shouts of those inside streamed out like a
river, and, like the sea, the voices of the crowd outside swallowed
them up. In a moment her horses were unharnessed, and the folk fought
and pushed for a place between the shafts. Indeed Sophia had come back.




CHAPTER XI.

A FOOL LEAVES RHODOPÉ.


Meantime, at the Palace the large house-party who were staying with
Petros for the New Year fêtes had heard the shouting, and wondered a
little nervously what it meant. They knew that the Bill for the
Abolition of Gambling-Houses was to be considered that afternoon, and
this acclamation, if it was to be referred to the Bill, could only mean
that it had been thrown out by an enormous majority. If so, how did
Petros stand? Was the shouting an applause to his vote recorded against
the Bill? And if so, how did Sophia stand? The subject was a delicate
one for guests to talk of, and they pretended not to hear the shouting,
and spoke politely together of the change in the weather.

But it ever grew in volume, and the noise was getting nearer.
Uncontrollable curiosity gained on them, and, rising, each questioned
the eyes of the others. Soon the shouting, like some tide on the flow,
reached the courtyard of the Palace, and a moment later the doors of the
great reception-room, where they were awaiting the coming of the Prince,
for the dinner-hour was now long past, were thrown open by the
major-domo, and to the incredible surprise of all--for she had dressed
at the English Legation--Sophia entered.

The Princess had no idea who formed the house-party which Petros had
invited for the New Year fêtes, but in the very flush of her triumph it
did not seem to her possible that there might be an awkward moment in
front of her. But had she known what presences that door flung wide
would show, even she might have paused. But, smiling, and on fire with
the music of the shouting, she sailed into the room. Just in front of
her, imminent and encompassing as a nightmare, stood Petros’s mother,
Princess Caroline of Herzegovina.

That remarkable lady was English, of overwhelming size, and she always
denied ever having been a barmaid at the Alhambra Theatre. She was
dressed--or you would rather say bound--in a ruby velvet gown, her
ornaments were cairngorms and turquoises, and her fan was of ostrich
feathers dyed pink. To her Prince Petros, in a moment of unguarded
confidence, had hinted at the upshot of this night’s work, and when she
saw Sophia her voluminous bodice remained expanded with a quick-taken
breath, and the two for a moment looked at each other in silence. Sophia
recovered herself first.

‘Oh, I am even as delighted and surprised to see you, dear Princess,’
she cried, ‘as you are to see me. I appear like the man in the moon, do
I not? It is ages since we met. Where is Petros, you ask me? Petros is
detained;’ and she passed on, shaking hands, to her other guests,
mistress of herself and her house.

The Princess Caroline’s face was a fine study for a man who was bold
enough to look at her. Her black, swarthy eyebrows meeting over her
large, parrot-like nose grew knotted with thought; she could not doubt
but that something had happened. What could this return of Sophia amid
acclamation and welcome portend? Where was Petros, who a few hours ago
had gone to the Assembly, tremulous, yet hopeful? Malakopf, too?
Malakopf was to have dined at the Palace to-night. He had not come, and
already Sophia had passed through the folding dining-room doors, and the
others were following. The arrangement of the table had been thrown
hopelessly out of gear by these alterations, but Sophia did not have
Malakopf’s chair removed. She herself, with an extraordinary naturalness
of manner, talked and laughed and ate and drank heartily and with great
enjoyment, and Princess Caroline grew momently more thunderous in aspect
and more apprehensive.

The dinner had been later than usual, and it was nearly ten when the
dessert was put on. Suddenly Sophia rose.

‘I must beg the attention of all of you a moment,’ she said. ‘You will
probably hear a strange story when we go to the ball to-night, and it is
as well that you should hear the truth of it from me, though in outline
only. I have come back just in time to nip in the bud a plot against the
House of Ægina, against me and my son. The authors of the plot are
consequently unable to attend. Let us rise from table, your Royal
Highnesses, my lords and ladies.’

Princess Caroline wavered a moment, then threw herself, fan, eyebrows
and all, at Sophia’s feet.

‘Oh, have pity!’ she cried, and in her emotion her breeding had its way.
‘Poor Petros never meant any ‘arm. Oh my! I don’t know what I shall do!
Where is poor Petros? Oh, let me go to him!’

Sophia motioned to her other guests to leave the room, and they were
left alone.

‘My poor dear Princess,’ she said, ‘Petros has made a tragic ass of
himself! He has been quite incredibly foolish and wicked. I am very
sorry, but I gave him a warning before, and he would not take it. Oh,
don’t cry so! He will not have his head cut off; but he will never sit
any more close to the throne of Rhodopé, because he tried to occupy the
seat. Yes, you shall see him to-morrow. You will not come to the fête
to-night, of course? I really am very sorry for you. Oh, please get up!
Your tiara has fallen off.’

Prince Petros--and herein was a sting--had ordered the fête on a scale
of unexampled magnificence to celebrate the events of the afternoon.
These events had turned out somewhat wide of his conjecture, but the
magnificence of the fête was unimpaired, and very fitly commemorated
Sophia’s return. He had planned an enthusiastic reception of himself and
Malakopf. Sophia took their place, but the enthusiasm of the welcome
fully came up to his imaginings.

The High Court of Justice met early the next week to try Prince Petros
and Malakopf. It was not difficult to find witnesses for the
prosecution, for the whole House had heard Malakopf’s public repudiation
of the House of Ægina, and Prince Petros, wise for once, when asked
whether or no he was guilty of high treason against his wife, the
Princess Sophia, pleaded guilty, hoping thereby for a mitigation of his
sentence. The Lord Chief Justice, as he was bound to do, pronounced
sentence of perpetual imprisonment at the Princess’s pleasure, and,
without ordering the removal of the prisoners from the dock, sent, in
accordance with the procedure of the Court of Rhodopé, a message to her,
to say that he had done his duty, and waited for the confirmation of the
sentence. She had also petitioned the Court for a separation between
herself and her husband, and this, of course, was granted her.

Sophia had spared the two the humiliation of a public trial, and the
case was tried _in camera_, there being present only the jury,
sufficient witnesses to establish the accusation, the judge, and the
counsel for and against the prisoners. In a few moments, however, the
door to the judge’s private rooms opened, and Sophia herself entered.

The Chief Justice immediately vacated his place, and all remained
standing till Sophia had seated herself. She was dressed in black, her
face was very stern, and Petros, looking thereon, felt his hopes die.

But she spoke first, not to him, but to Malakopf.

‘Alexis Malakopf, prisoner at the bar,’ she said, ‘Prime Minister of my
Government, you have been found guilty of high treason, and for you I
have no pity. I heard your words spoken in the Assembly, I heard your
astounding insults and repudiation of our Royal House. How is it
possible for me to mitigate your sentence? You are not young, you have
not been led away by another; you are old, and you are wicked. Long ago
I knew what you were planning, long ago you made a boast that my husband
was but the glove which covered your hand. Do you remember your words? I
see that you do. I may have been unwise--I have been unwise in many
things--but I have ever dealt frankly with you. I will hear if you have
anything to say in your defence. But if you have any self-respect left,
I cannot conjecture what you will say.’

There was silence in the court.

‘So be it,’ said Sophia at length; ‘as you have sown, so shall you reap.
You have been accused of high treason to my house, you have been found
guilty. Your crime is the more odious in that you must needs act through
another; you must needs make my unhappy husband your tool. You have done
a monstrous thing. The sentence of the Court is confirmed, and for the
remainder of your days you are confined in our prison at Amandos.’

Malakopf was removed, and when he had gone Sophia turned to Petros.

‘Oh, Petros,’ she said, leaning forward, and speaking so that he alone
could clearly hear her, ‘have I deserved this of you? What had I done
that you could treat me so? Was it not your place rather to reason with
me, if you thought I was acting unwisely for my people? If you thought I
ought to have been more sedulous in my duties, should you not have told
me so? Yes, you will say that I did not give a very patient ear to you,
and thus the fault is partly mine, and I own it. But no good fruit ever
came out of disloyalty, and even if your infamous plan had succeeded,
the fruit would have been an apple from the Dead Sea, dust and ashes to
your mouth. Perhaps this is no time to make reproaches, but we shall not
meet again, my poor Petros, and what I have to say to you must be said
now.’

She stopped a moment; her voice was soft with tears, and trembled. The
unhappy man had covered his face with his hands, and his shoulders shook
with his sobbing.

‘Petros,’ she went on, ‘what a change is here, since when you came so
gallantly to Amandos, since we sat all night at bezique, since we rode
to the review, and raced home! We have not made a very successful
marriage, and I blame myself, believe me, as much as you. But that it
should come to this! There I blame you. Did I not warn you? Have the
justice to admit that I warned you when I told you that you were no
Napoleon. Jesting words, no doubt; but you are not slow, and you saw
what I meant. Oh, I know well that you saw what I meant. Again, when I
left Mavromáti, did I not say that I trusted you to the utmost? I could
think of nothing which should have been so tonic as that. If there had
been one seed of loyalty in you, those words should have warmed and
watered it.’

Petros raised his head.

‘Before God, Sophia,’ he cried, ‘I never thought----’

She shook her head.

‘Do not say that,’ she said, ‘for you did think. You must have
calculated long and carefully. I should, I think, have forgiven you if
you had in some sudden exasperation tried to cut my throat, for I know
how exasperating I must often have been; but this scheming and
cold-blooded conspiracy, it beats me! I cannot understand it. My poor
friend, I do not mean to mock at you, but you would have been a more
successful figure to-day if you had stuck to your riding and your
bezique. Good-bye, Petros; we shall not meet again. You shall know how
Leonard grows up.’

He buried his face in his hands, unable to look at her, waiting only for
the confirmation of his sentence. Sophia paused, allowing her emotion to
quiet itself, and then spoke in a firm voice:

‘The separation granted by the court between Prince Petros and myself is
confirmed,’ she said. ‘But the Crown, having pity for the Prince’s
youth, and bearing in mind that he was no more than the tool of another,
commutes his sentence of perpetual imprisonment to perpetual banishment
from the realm of Rhodopé. He is free to go and to do as he will
outside our dominions. He will leave Mavromáti this afternoon in the
royal yacht _Felatrune_, to the commander of which orders shall be given
to go where the Prince directs. He will be removed secretly, so that no
public disrespect shall be shown him. I thank you, my Lord Chief Justice
and gentlemen. The court is adjourned.’

She stepped down from the Bench, and went to the front of the dock,
holding out her hand.

‘Good-bye, Petros,’ she said, and with a sudden flood of tears he bent
and kissed it.




CHAPTER XII.

THE EDUCATION OF THE HEIR-APPARENT.


Prince Leonard early exhibited that same craving for diversion and
excitement which had made the childhood of his mother so full of
incident to her teachers. He could not, as she had done, request
reluctant tutors to elope with him, but he made their lives burdensome
by a scientific curiosity to observe their conduct under such trying
circumstances as the cold aspersion of unsuspected booby-traps. Indeed,
such was the continuous pressure of his animal spirits, and his greed of
adventure, that the gentlemen who held these brief appointments were as
precariously situated as engine-drivers the boilers of whose machines
might be expected momentarily to burst. He was an excellent rider, born
to the saddle, and at the age of eleven his handicap at golf was only
nine. He had a fanatical abhorrence of his lessons, and his natural
linguistic powers, and the royal birthright of memory, made whatever
intellectual task he was good enough to undertake extremely easy to him.
He had the fair skin and dark hair of his mother, and in the whole
realm of Rhodopé there was not a more lovable or so unmanageable a boy.

When he was just thirteen, he indulged in a series of escapades that
made Sophia take him seriously. The first of these was that he
challenged, fought with, and wrought havoc upon the pasty person of the
son of the Mayor of Amandos, an act undignified in one of his station,
and performed in a manner distressingly public. The two, stripped to
their shirts and trousers, had fought three rounds in the square in
front of the cathedral, while Sophia, with whom Leonard had been driving
to a public function, paid a call of condolence on the wife of the
Mayor, a victim to neuralgia. The Princess and she had been sitting in a
room overlooking the square, when the hubbub from outside, and shouts of
‘Go it, Prince Leonard! Three to one on the Prince!’ caused them
simultaneously to rise, and run in apprehensive haste to the window. The
carriage, which had waited in the street, was tenantless, the Prince’s
hat and sailor jacket were lying in the road, a crowd of street-boys
made an enthusiastic ring, and the heir-apparent to the throne had his
opponent’s head comfortably in chancery. The wife of the Mayor gazed but
for one moment, and then shrieking out, ‘The monster! he will kill my
child!’ rushed distractedly from the room. Sophia followed, and on the
stairs ran into the boy’s tutor, who, being totally unable to stop him
fighting, had very sensibly hastened to tell his mother. The Mayoress
bore her battered offspring away, and Sophia returned to the carriage
with Leonard.

‘Oh, mother, didn’t I give it him!’ cried the boy. ‘My knuckles are
quite sore with hitting his great head. He couldn’t have lasted another
round.’

‘Put on your jacket at once, Leonard,’ said his mother sternly. ‘You,
the Prince, fighting in the public street! I wonder you are not
ashamed!’

‘But I couldn’t help it,’ cried Leonard. ‘I had to fight him. He said
things about you.’

‘Don’t talk so loud, Leonard,’ said Sophia. ‘Tell me what he said.’

‘He said that you were the most notor--notorious--he always uses words a
yard long--the most notorious gambler in Rhodopé; so, of course, I said
he lied, and would he fight or take a licking? Indeed, he did both.’

His mother flushed with pleasure, but she sighed at the end.

‘I’m afraid he was near the mark, Lennie,’ she said.

‘But what is notorious?’ asked Leonard, ‘I didn’t know what he meant,
but, anyhow, it was calling you names.’

‘It means the most regular,’ said Sophia.

Leonard considered a moment with his head on one side.

‘That doesn’t sound very bad,’ he said; ‘but, anyhow, he had no business
to say so. No. I’m glad I fought him. Lord, how sore he will be!’

He smoothed his ruffled hair, and put his hat on.

‘I suppose it is true that you are at the club pretty often?’ he
continued. ‘Mother, will you take me there sometimes? I have never
been.’

Sophia felt suddenly serious and responsible.

‘No; never,’ she said with energy. ‘Promise me you will never go. I
certainly shall not take you there; it is no place for you.’

‘Then, some day I shall go without you,’ remarked Leonard.

Sophia was so anxious that he should not--why, it perhaps would have
puzzled her to say, except that she vaguely pictured his fresh young
face looking singularly out of place in that gas-lit assembly--that she
did her best to persuade him to promise that he would never set foot in
the club, but unavailingly. The more she urged, the more Leonard’s
desire to go increased.

‘And,’ as he remarked with candour, ‘I shan’t make a promise, because
then I should feel obliged to keep it.’

So at last she desisted, feeling she would have been wiser not to have
urged, and hoping that the boy would forget about it; for she would
sooner he fought the Mayor’s son than cut his gambling teeth, and,
indeed, the history of their quarrel had warmed her heart.

Two evenings afterwards she was sitting at her usual place on the right
of Pierre, playing roulette. She was enjoying a rare run of luck, and
her stakes were recklessly high. She had just placed the limit on a
single number, when, looking up, she saw opposite her a young girl
seated at the table watching the game with flushed and wide-eyed
interest. She turned to Blanche Amesbury, who was sitting next her.

‘Look at that pretty child opposite,’ she said. ‘But what a way to dress
a girl! She must be the daughter of that English brewer peer. What
refined types you meet among the bourgeois! How its dear little heart is
in the game! Yet it seems almost a shame to bring it here--this is no
place for children--but the _nouveaux riches_ are always horrible.
Why---- Oh, good gracious me! it’s Leonard.’

Leonard caught the sound of his name, and looked up for a fraction of a
second.

‘Oh, a moment--a moment!’ he cried. ‘Fourteen, fifteen---- Hurrah!
sixteen wins. Good old sixteen! I wish I had staked on a single number
instead of the half-dozen.’

He had been so absorbed in the game that for a moment he did not notice
his self-betrayal, nor the shout of laughter which followed; but now he
stood there in all the conscious shame of his girl’s dress. He blushed
up to the roots of his hair, and pushed his way confusedly out of the
room, forgetting even to take with him what he had won on the last roll.

Sophia tried to look grave and unconscious, but in a few seconds the
corners of her mouth broke down, and she leaned back in her chair with
peal after peal of laughter.

‘Oh, I could never have invented so divinely apt a punishment!’ she
cried. ‘Leonard detected in a girl’s dress, and before all the people!
Indeed, that is an instance of the fierce light that beats upon a
throne. Oh, how furious he will be! I wonder where he got his costume.
His hat--oh, my dear Blanche! his hat! It was like Covent Garden on a
summer’s morning--a cargo of flowers and nameless vegetables. Oh, I
cannot stop; I must go and rub the lesson in. He has a horror of making
himself ridiculous. Perhaps this will cure him for awhile.’

Sophia went straight back to the Palace, where the servants were all
agape to see her return so early, and to Leonard’s room. He had got
there only a moment before her, since she had taken the short-cut
through the private door in the Palace garden, and he was tearing the
detected finery from him. On his bed lay the hat, a perfect garden of
magenta roses and sage-green ribbons, and he was even then wrestling
with the hooks and eyes of the bodice. The boy stamped his foot angrily
when he saw her, and his cheeks were redder than the roses in his hat
and infinitely more healthy in tone.

‘Why did you make a fool of me, mother,’ he cried, ‘before all those
people? I shall never be able to go to the Casino again. It was brutal
of you, and I was enjoying myself so much.’

Sophia burst out laughing.

‘Dear Lennie, what a lovely hat!’ she cried. ‘Where did you get it? I
shall order one like it, and we will go driving together in them. Do
you propose to wear that dress always instead of your sailor clothes?
It is not very well cut. As for my making a fool of you, I think you are
more to blame than I. How could you do such a thing!’

‘It was your fault,’ cried he. ‘I had forgotten everything in the game.
Oh, these strings! I think the devil made them.’

‘And a fool tied them,’ said Sophia. ‘Here, let me do them for you. I
thought the dress did not fit very well, and no wonder, if you had your
shirt on under the bodice and your trousers under the skirt. And where
are your stays? It is all your fault, Leonard; I told you not to go to
the club.’

‘I hope you didn’t think I was going to obey you?’ said Leonard, with
singular contempt.

‘Anyhow, you thought fit to disobey me--oh, don’t wriggle so!--and you
have been very properly paid out for it. You are too young to gamble. My
poor boy! every shopkeeper in Rhodopé is laughing at you this moment,
and I’m sure I don’t wonder. For me, I have never been so nearly
hysterical; I was helpless with laughter. I told you you were too young
to gamble, and you would not take my word for it. You have been very
naughty and disobedient, and you made a thorough exhibition of
yourself--within three days to fight in the streets and to dress up as
Polly to go to the Casino. Oh, that hat! What a creation!’ and she began
to laugh again. ‘I thought you were one of the bourgeois.’

Leonard stepped out of the skirt, and pulled down his trousers, which he
had rolled up to the knees over his sturdy calves, and regarded his
mother critically.

‘I say, mother, you know you must have begun pretty young, too,’ he
said. ‘The earliest thing I can remember is being told you were the
finest gambler in Europe. I watched you playing to-night. You played
very quietly, and by your face a man could not tell whether you had won
or lost. Is that the _chic_ way to gamble?’

‘That is the only way to gamble,’ said she, forgetting for a moment the
moral lesson. ‘I have seen men and women tremble so that they could
scarcely pick up their winnings. Whatever you do, always keep quiet at
the tables. There is no such test of decent breeding.’

‘You must teach me,’ said Leonard insidiously. ‘We might play for--for
counters at first, quietly, at home.’

‘That would be very amusing,’ remarked his mother, ‘and roulette for two
would certainly be a novelty; but I don’t want you to grow up a gambler,
Leonard.’

‘Yet to-night I found it very entertaining; and did not you grow up a
gambler?’ said he. ‘Also, it seemed to me easy, which is an advantage.’

‘Easy! There is no such word. There is good luck and bad luck; that is
all the vocabulary.’

‘When did you first begin playing?’ asked he.

‘When I was too young.’

‘Then, I expect that was a very long time ago,’ said the boy; ‘for I do
not see how you can begin too early;’ and with this the conversation
closed. Sophia, as may have been detected, could never have been
predestined to attain to eminence as a disciplinarian, and Leonard’s
tutors, like her own, proved about equally inefficient in managing him.
One after another were surveyed by the boy, and judged wanting. One
could not ride, another could not shoot, a third wore spectacles, and
topped his drives with unique regularity; but one and all joined hands
in this, that they were totally unable to make him learn except when he
chose to learn, or to exercise the slightest discipline over him out of
lesson hours, and very little in.

Sophia soon grew considerably exercised about the boy. She had begun to
see that the atmosphere of the Palace of Amandos was not entirely
wholesome. He was not disciplined in any way, which she considered the
worst preparation for a lad who would one day be an autocratic
Sovereign. She compared the escapades of her own youth with his, and had
to confess that she, at any rate, had been a little in awe of her
father. She had often revolted, but with an uneasy feeling that
consequences might follow, and thus disobedience had its drawbacks.
Leonard, on the other hand, disobeyed her whistling, with his tongue in
his cheek, and to him disobedience never seemed to bring with it any
drawbacks at all. By the time she saw him next she would have forgotten
about the incident, or if she remembered it, and began a little homily,
Leonard would shut his eyes, turn down the corners of his mouth, and,
with an air inexpressibly comic, say, ‘Let us pray.’ Once she had
instructed Mr. Lanthony, the tutor with the spectacles, not without much
inward misgiving, to use the cane to Leonard next time punishment was
necessary, and, such an occasion occurring within an hour of the edict,
Leonard had thrown a copy of Magnall’s Questions at Mr. Lanthony’s face
when he produced the cane with so much precision that his spectacles
were dashed into a thousand fragments, and his eyes gushed out with
involuntary water. His mother had not told the boy that the proposed
caning was consonant to her orders, and Leonard came to her in much
indignation.

‘Mother,’ he cried, ‘you couldn’t guess what has happened if you tried a
hundred times: that old giglamps said he would cane me this
morning--me!’ and he tapped his waistcoat.

‘I am convinced you deserved it,’ said his mother calmly.

‘And I am convinced that his spectacles will never be fit to see through
again,’ retorted Leonard, angry at finding her so unsympathetic.

‘Leonard, what have you done?’ she said.

‘I threw Magnall’s Questions at him hard,’ he said; ‘and thus his
spectacles are not worth anything now.’

‘You wicked boy!’ cried his mother. ‘It was I who told Mr. Lanthony to
cane you. You are very naughty and mischievous, and you must go and beg
Mr. Lanthony’s pardon, and take your caning like a man; and your
pocket-money shall be stopped to pay for his spectacles.’

Down went the corners of Leonard’s mouth.

‘Oh, dear!’ he sighed; ‘let us pray; but get it over quick.’

In effect Mr. Lanthony had to do without the apology, and Prince Leonard
without his caning; but the tutor had an interview with Sophia, and,
after tendering his resignation, ventured to offer a word of advice.

‘I should lose no time in sending him to Eton,’ he said.

‘Who is Eton?’ asked his mother.

Mr. Lanthony was frankly horrified.

‘Eton is a school, your Royal Highness,’ he replied; ‘in fact, it is
_the_ school. It seems strange to an Englishman to find even in Rhodopé
that Eton is unknown; but “Non cuivis attingit adire Corinthum.”’

‘I beg your pardon?’ said Sophia politely.

‘I merely said Eton was a school,’ said Mr. Lanthony.

‘I think I have heard of it, now I consider,’ said Sophia. ‘It is near
Windsor, is it not? What does one do? Shall I take a house for him, or
will he live in London, and go down for an hour or two every day?’

‘That will not be necessary,’ replied Mr. Lanthony. ‘The house, on the
other hand, will take him;’ and he sketched to the Princess the main
features of a public school.

‘Yes, it sounds nice,’ she said vaguely; ‘but he is, as you know, so
high-spirited. Will they try to cane him there? I tremble to think what
will happen--dear me! your eye _is_ bad, Mr. Lanthony--if the headmaster
tries to cane him.’

Mr. Lanthony gave the ghost of a smile. His mouth was untouched by
Magnall’s Questions.

‘I don’t think you need consider that, your Royal Highness,’ he
said--‘at least, you need not be uneasy for the headmaster; nor, indeed,
for the Prince--the birch is quite harmless.’

‘The birch!’ cried Sophia. ‘How terrible it sounds!’

‘It is of no consequence,’ said Mr. Lanthony gravely; and the pain of
Magnall’s Questions grew sensibly less.

‘Well, we must ask Leonard,’ said his mother. ‘Supposing he refuses to
go? What are we to do then? I don’t think either of us has much
influence with him, you know.’

But Leonard, when appealed to, was considerably taken with the idea;
there would be a lot of boys to play with, and he wanted to go to
England.

‘I expect it’s more fun with heaps of other boys than with one old muff
at a time,’ he said. ‘Yes, I’ll be an Eton boy.’

When Sophia had made up her mind to a thing, she was not slow to put it
into execution. She wrote an exceedingly kind and condescending letter
to the headmaster, giving him to understand that she was prepared to
confer this priceless boon on Eton at Mr. Lanthony’s recommendation;
but that gentleman, to whom she read it, advised another tone. The
headmaster was radically-minded, and would not be likely to be dazzled
at the prospect; she could put it more simply. Indeed, perhaps it would
be better if he wrote himself to a housemaster he knew there, asking if
he could by any means secure a vacancy in his house for a boy aged
fourteen, or if he knew of anyone else who had a vacancy. All this
sounded terribly democratic to the Princess; but, having failed so
signally herself with Leonard, she was desirous that other more
practised hands should take the reins from her, and she would, so she
expressed herself with a little acidity, go down on her knees before all
the masters in Christendom if this were the more proper attitude to
take.

It was finally arranged that Leonard should enter the school in April,
and Sophia threw herself with zest into the scheme. She conferred on his
housemaster the Second Order of the Bronze Cross, and sent him the key
to a private cipher, by means of which he could daily communicate with
her. She asked whether £1,000 pocket-money a term would be sufficient to
supply her boy with school requisites, and whether she should open an
account for him at the Eton and Windsor Bank. She hoped they would all
remember--perhaps he would be so good as to speak to his colleagues
about it--how exceedingly high-spirited the Prince was, and how little
discipline he had yet received. Finally, she drove the unfortunate man
to the verge of imbecility by saying that she hoped they allowed no
roulette _at all_ in the school, and only vingt-et-un at moderate
points. Mr. Lanthony had already left for England before this unhappy
series of letters was despatched, or some of them might have been
averted.

Leonard left for England at the end of March, and it was in a way an
immense relief to his mother when he had gone, for she felt strangely
responsible for his education. She had made up her mind that he was to
be a good ruler, and she saw clearly that Rhodopé was no place for him
yet. Her own popularity had redeemed, so far, her reign from failure,
but she was candid enough to allow that she might have let her sphere
border more nearly on usefulness. Prince Petros’s mad attempt had been
an unexampled piece of luck; it had given her an _éclat_ she could
scarcely have won otherwise, so also had her institution of the club.
She had founded it to supply amusement to herself; she found that she
had given occupation to her people. But already she foresaw that in the
course of years the morals of the people would deteriorate, the hardy
mountain folk would become people of the asphalt, of the gaslight. As
long as the club continued to act as a star for the enjoyment of
health-questing moths, so long, no doubt, would the Budget of Rhodopé be
a pattern to other more puritanically constituted States; but the
surplus on the Budget would be paid for in other ways. She saw the sheep
of Rhodopé without their shepherds; she saw the vineyards without their
vine-diggers; she dimly forecast the army destitute of privates, and
peopled only with honorary colonels. She had the grace to shudder at the
logical outcome of the era she had instituted, only she could not in her
own person break the chain of circumstance on which it hung. Amandos
without the club! She starved at the thought. It had been bad enough
before; now, when the days there had actually ceased to be tedious,
owing to the diversions supplied by her roulette, with what a cold
shuddering of the spirit she saw herself shorn of that which made life
tolerable! But that chain of circumstances should be broken by her son.
She had endowed him with the gambling blood, but that was inevitable; at
least she was now making an effort whereby the hereditary instinct
should not come to fruition. She had sent him to England, that home of
three-penny points; she had expressed herself most clearly to his
housemaster at Eton on the question of roulette. She could not have done
more, and her conscience approved her.

Meantime, throughout the length and breadth of Europe her reputation had
gone abroad. Her great _coup_, now eleven years ago, which had steadied
the tottering House of Ægina, had taken hold on the popular imagination,
and the boldness and dash of the move had raised up in real hosts those
unknown admirers which so many of those who act in public secretly and
mistakenly suppose are theirs. That return from Corfu, triumphant over a
riotous and wrecking sea, the cross-country sledge journey, the arrival
in the nick of time, the hopeless and utter defeat of her husband and
the acuter Malakopf, her rapturous welcome by the people, were all
things to enkindle the blood in an age in which diplomatic papers are
sufficient to set the world blazing. She was a picturesque figure, and
an unpicturesque epoch has always this saving grace, that it delights in
picturesque figures when they do appear. However much we may live
environed by gray and green, a vivider tint is ever applauded. Again,
she was admirably posed. To the eye of Europe she went stake in hand
from the roulette-board to the rescue of her House, and having saved her
House, went back to where the ball was still rolling and won. She had
dash and brilliance and beauty, she was neither prude nor puritan.
Indeed, she seemed one of those to whom success comes as if by
birthright.

But with the instinct of a true gambler, she called her own success a
run of luck. Sooner or later, unless her line staked on another colour,
it would go against them, and her resolution to reform took the shape of
reforming, or rather putting on the other colour, her son, Prince
Leonard. She was determined, at the sacrifice of her natural desire, to
see him but seldom; he should be a stranger to the tables of Rhodopé and
the Riviera; he should play cricket and polo and hockey--whatever that
was--instead of bezique and baccarat. She was herself so warm an admirer
of the open air, that she felt she was not starving him. Had she not
been a Princess, she would have chosen to be a man and a dweller in the
mountains. Horses and dogs, a keen eye, and an obedient hand, were
admirable things, and good enough for anybody.

For the next few years Leonard did not set foot in Rhodopé at all, and
he saw his mother occasionally only, in her short and scarce visits to
England. At Eton the high spirit which his mother had feared would be a
source of possible danger to the head had shown itself reasonable, and
in the course of one painful interview between the two, of which the
cause was tobacco, and the end the birch, no books had been thrown. He
did the minimum of work required with cheerfulness, if not zest, and,
far more important, he was immensely popular with his fellows. He grew
tall and strong on the banks of the Thames. At the age of sixteen he got
into the eleven, and in the match against Harrow cracked the enamelled
face of the clock at Lord’s off a half-volley just outside his
leg-stump. He also indulged in various other amusements, which as yet
had not come to light, but which appeared in damning concourse very
shortly indeed before he left.

One morning in July he went into his room after twelve to change for
cricket. On the table were two letters--one from his mother, who told
him that she was on her way to England, and would arrive at the end of
the month. She would stay a few days in London, and if Eton had broken
up he had better come to her there. It was long since she had been in
London, and they would see the sights together, from the Westminster
Aquarium to the Tower of London, and from Madame Tussaud’s even to the
Zoological Gardens and the Adelphi Theatre. There was no harm, she said,
in a little gaiety, and she did not wish to cut Leonard off from all
amusements. The other letter was from a groom of some training stables,
and it interested him far more, for it gave the best possible account of
Muley Moloch, a horse which Leonard was backing heavily for the Eclipse
Stakes at Sandown. Accordingly at the end of the half Leonard went up to
London to join his mother. She had taken a great suite of rooms at the
Hôtel Métropole, with a private entrance, where she lived under her
usual incognito of the Countess of Ægina.

Leonard arrived late in the evening, and found her with a few friends
playing baccarat. His mother threw down her cards when he entered.

‘Dearest Leonard!’ she cried; ‘but I should scarcely have known you. How
you have grown, and how you have improved! I am so delighted to see you
again! Have you dined?’

Indeed, any mother might have been proud of him. He had grown up tall,
well-looking, and with an extraordinary frankness and charm of manner.
Though he was still but seventeen, he looked almost a man, and Princess
Sophia felt how wise she had been to send him to school.

‘I have dined,’ he said, after being introduced to his mother’s guests.
‘And if you will let me, mother, I will join you in your game.
Baccarat, is it not? A good game.’

‘Oh, Leonard, what business have you to know that!’ cried his mother. ‘I
particularly asked that no baccarat should be allowed at Eton.’

Leonard laughed.

‘It is strictly prohibited,’ he said; ‘every boy at Eton will tell you
so. Do not blame the masters. Will you lend me some money, mother?’

Though the Princess would have preferred that he should not play at all,
she had the consolation of that he played well. His face was a mask of
good breeding, not an eyelash betrayed emotion, and he looked gravely
amused whether he won or lost.

‘He is a born gambler. It is in the blood, you know,’ she said under her
breath to her cousin, the Duchess of Winchester, who was sitting next to
her, and the Duchess thought she detected pride and not regret alone in
her voice.

Mother and son, as arranged, went out the next days to see the sights of
London. To the Princess it seemed to have grown sadder and foggier since
she had seen it last. Their expeditions were mostly made on foot, for
the Princess loved the bustle and stir of the streets, and more than
once they made the top of an omnibus their observatory.

‘There are plenty of people, certainly,’ she said one day to Leonard, as
they swayed and rolled up Baker Street; ‘and I love crowds. But observe
their infinite sadness of demeanour. What a load of responsibility
seems to rest on the least and meanest shoulders! Look at that baker
there! If he was in Rhodopé I would make him Court undertaker. To what
genuine melancholy is he the prey! If I was responsible for the whole
creation, I should not be so sad. And they all walk so fast, as if they
were going to catch the dying words of a near and dear relative, and
would only just get there in time. After all, I am glad I am a
Southerner. We may not be so good, but we are certainly gayer. And it is
certainly good to be gay.’

They stopped at the corner where Madame Tussaud’s red exhibition stood,
and Leonard, who for some minutes had been with difficulty restraining
his laughter, suddenly burst out into a great shout of amusement.

‘England, at any rate, has not made you sad at present,’ said the
Princess. ‘What is the matter, Leonard?’

‘Oh, nothing,’ said the lad; ‘at least, you will soon know.’

She paid their entrance-money--Leonard tossed his mother who should pay
for both, and won--and began the tour of the room. Suddenly the Princess
gave a little exclamation of horrified surprise, and rapidly turned up
No. 27 in the catalogue. What met her indignant eye was this:

‘_The gambling Princess Sophia._--Princess Sophia of Rhodopé, though
only just forty, is surely the most rankly notorious crowned head of
Europe. She spends the greater part of every day in the club she has
started at the capital, Amandos, and the era of gambling she has
introduced is rapidly undermining the physique and morale of her little
kingdom. She has confined her old Prime Minister, Malakopf, a financier
of European reputation, to a life-long imprisonment for some imaginary
plot against the throne; and her husband, Prince Petros of Herzegovina,
she has divorced and banished from the principality of Rhodopé. He is
described by those who knew him as a man of charming manner and quick
insight. The Princess has a violent temper and is growing very stout.
Her only son, Prince Leonard, is at school at Eton.’

The room was almost empty, and Leonard put no bounds to his amusement.
He stamped and choked, his mouth was full of laughter.

‘Oh, oh!’ he cried, ‘it is too funny! And, mother, I hear they are
thinking of sending you to the Chamber of Horrors. I stayed in London
last long leave and saw it. Oh, oh, the Chamber of Horrors, with
murderers and Phœnix Park tragedians and people who have their throats
cut in their baths. Oh, I shall burst!’

Sophia turned icily from him, read the description of herself through
again in the catalogue, and then examined the figure. It was seated in
the most realistic pose in front of a small green-cloth table. One hand
held three or four playing-cards, the other was clutched on a heap of
counterfeit coins. It represented her in full evening dress, with the
Order of the Silver Cross and the Salamander on her shoulder, both
faultlessly executed. Her dress was of white brocade, and it might have
been copied by Worth himself, so she thought, from the gown which she
had worn on the night of her memorable and unexpected home-coming. The
pasty, formless fingers glittered with immense glass jewels; she wore a
tiara of diamonds, and a copy in some cheap and tawdry material of the
Rhodopé pearls.

But it was the presentment of the face that most appalled the Princess.
The likeness was unmistakable, yet it was the most prodigious parody.
She herself was pleasantly furnished with flesh, the waxwork bulged with
fatness. Her own black eyes, with their long lashes, became wicked lakes
of darkness, her fine-lipped mouth was moulded into evil and monstrous
curves. Avarice sat enthroned in her greedy expression and in the
clutching hand.

The Princess examined it with scrupulous care, then turned with a
petrified face to Leonard, who was wiping his eyes. Every now and then a
fresh gust of laughter shook him, and he held his aching ribs for fear
they should burst. Sophia watched him a moment with malignity; it seemed
yet doubtful whether she would run her parasol through the face of the
waxwork, or box his ears; but by degrees the infection of his merriment
caught her, and sitting down by him on a crimson-covered ottoman, she
gave way to peal after peal of laughter. He had been on the verge of
recovery, but they mutually infected one another, and in a few moments
were equally lost to all power of speech, and could only point feebly
and shakingly, as they shook and rolled on the sofa, at the greedy and
clutching figure of the waxwork. A few more people had come into the
gallery, and were attracted by this convulsed couple, but, with the
supercilious contempt with which the English regard merriment in which
they do not share, passed them by. Close at hand, however, sat the
figure of the gambling Princess, and one by one they glanced back
furtively to the real one on the crimson ottoman. There could be no
mistaking, even in the convulsions of her laughter, the prototype of the
figure.

Soon Princess Sophia observed this, and with a sudden accession of
dignity hurried Leonard off.

‘Let me show you the way to the Chamber of Horrors,’ he said, in a voice
vibrating with suppressed laughter, ‘so that you will know where to look
for yourself next year.’

They could give but a superficial attention to that temple of classical
criminals. Sophia longed to go back to her own figure, which exercised a
strange fascination over her. She wanted to see the manager, to have him
to dinner, to hail him as the first humorist in Europe. Then she
protested that it was monstrous that she should have to pay to see an
exhibition in which she herself was so leading an attraction. She was
half inclined to demand her money back at the door, had it not been for
the treat she had enjoyed in seeing herself as others, or, at any rate,
that strict moralist who wrote the account of the figure, saw her. The
Monument, the Zoological Gardens, the Underground Railway, even a most
remarkable play at one of the West End theatres, where two ignoble
gentlemen cut through a pack to see who should marry an heiress, both
turning up sevens and then kings, had a touch of bathos after Madame
Tussaud’s; and Leonard and Sophia went back there more than once and
found the joke remained of that superlative order which is only enhanced
by repetition. The Princess, even in her middle life, retained a
youthful passion for being amused, but never, so she thought, had she
made a better investment in joy than with those shillings she paid to
the doorkeeper at the waxwork show.

She remained in England all August and September, and in the third week
of that month Leonard went back to Eton. Sophia, who wished to see the
place, paid him a visit there, and made herself remarkably popular by
securing for the school the promise of an extra week in the next summer
holidays, in honour of her visit. In eight weeks Leonard would be easily
repaid for his four days’ journey to Rhodopé, and she intended him to
come home, for the first time since he went to Eton. _Femme propose._

She was to leave England about the middle of October, and a week before
she should have started she was back in London again from a round of
visits. One morning she found on her breakfast-table a letter with the
Eton postmark on it, but not addressed in Leonard’s hand. She opened it
without apprehension, and read the following statement in the
headmaster’s neat and scholarly handwriting:

     /* NIND ‘YOUR ROYAL HIGHNESS, */

     ‘Little did I think when we had the honour so short a time ago of
     welcoming your Royal Highness to Eton that it would be my painful
     duty to write this letter to you. Your son, Prince Leonard, was
     found last week to have visited the Windsor races, where he was
     seen smoking and talking to a successful jockey, whose equestrian
     skill, so it appeared, had been the means of winning your son a
     considerable sum of money. This offence could not, of course, be
     passed over, and it was my duty to visit it on him in the most
     severe manner--in short, I gave him a flogging. But he refused,
     apparently, to take the warning to heart, and yesterday evening his
     housemaster, going into his room, found him, with several other
     boys, engaged in a game of roulette. This was more particularly
     heinous, since I well remember how warmly your Royal Highness urged
     on us not to allow roulette in the school. I therefore beg to
     advise your Royal Highness to remove Prince Leonard at once from
     Eton, to save him the disgrace, which must otherwise be inevitable,
     of being expelled. The roulette-board I send to you to-day by
     parcel post. I must add that Prince Leonard was most anxious to
     have it understood that he had persuaded the others to play, in
     spite of their unwillingness.’

Sophia did as she was advised, and instantly telegraphed to the
headmaster, saying that she intended to remove her son at once from
Eton. She was exceedingly annoyed at what had occurred, and felt quite
angry with Leonard. She had expressly desired him not to play roulette;
it was very tiresome to be disobeyed like this. She had hoped that he
would have learned obedience at school. As for his removal from Eton, it
was most inconvenient; she was at her wits’ end to know what to do with
him. It would hardly be possible, at his age, to send him to Harrow;
besides, she believed that Harrow boys always fought with Eton boys, and
wore swallow-tail coats in the morning, which would never do. That the
headmaster of Harrow would not be infinitely delighted at his entering
there did not for a moment occur to her.

Her annoyance was very materially increased by the arrival of the
roulette-board. It was a villainous piece of construction, faulty in
carpentering, odiously coloured with the crudest and most violent tints;
and it contained two zeros. She had, as the reader will have gathered,
no moral objection at all to gambling, but her horror of not doing the
thing properly was vital and ineradicable. In a fit of anger she smashed
it into bits and threw the pieces on to the fire.

Later in the day Leonard arrived, completely himself.

‘How could you be so stupid and disobedient!’ cried the Princess. ‘And,
Leonard, to play with that roulette-board is a disgrace.’

Leonard looked up in surprise.

‘How have you seen it? Where is it?’ he asked.

‘It is at present in ash in the grate, and its finer particles are
contributing to the London fog,’ said the Princess, with some asperity.
‘In fact, I threw it into the fire. The headmaster sent it me.’

‘I thought we might have had a game together this evening,’ said
Leonard, seating himself. ‘What was the good of burning it? Besides, it
was mine. Oh, mother’--and his handsome face flushed with a sudden fresh
eagerness--‘you never saw such a run of luck as I had last night! I
staked three times on thirteen, and won twice!’

‘On thirteen! Good gracious,’ cried the Princess, ‘it is madness,
Leonard! No wonder your housemaster came in and discovered you. Dear me,
I remember horrifying your poor foolish father so much at Monte Carlo by
backing single numbers. He had a system. Thank Heaven, you did not get
caught playing on a system! The disgrace would have been double. I am
spared that.’

Sophia pulled herself up sharp, for she was aware that her instinct had
taken the reins from the serious spirit with which she had intended to
handle Leonard. The little homily she had prepared had merged into the
never-ending discussion on the subject of number thirteen.

‘But I am very much shocked and distressed at all this, Leonard,’ she
went on. ‘You have ruined and cut short your school career, and
disgraced your name.’

Leonard’s eyes began to twinkle.

‘How about Madame Tussaud’s?’ he asked. ‘I am not the first.’

‘That is beside the point,’ said Sophia, and when the boy laughed
outright: ‘At any rate, it is no good talking of that. Oh, but it was
very funny! Well, Leonard, I do not mean to send you to the other public
school--what is it called?--Harrow. Also, I do not intend you to come
and live idly at Rhodopé.’

‘No, that would be rather too slow after England,’ remarked Leonard.

‘Well, what do you want to do? Can’t you suggest anything?’ asked the
Princess, with some impatience.

‘I should like to stay in England, or travel, perhaps. Yes; why
shouldn’t I travel?’

‘I think that is the best thing you could do,’ said the Princess, ‘and I
am glad you suggested it. But I shall have to get you a tutor; it will
be a great expense. I suppose you will go round the world. We will go to
some agent to-morrow--I suppose there are agents for such things--and
see how they are done.’

As usual, the Princess put her purpose into effect without loss of time.
She advertised for a travelling tutor, and for three days made the life
of Thomas Cook and Sons but a parody of existence. She went to the
docks, and inspected large numbers of ocean liners, and at length fixed
upon a vessel of the Peninsular and Oriental line, which would take him
as far as Egypt. There he would spend a few weeks, go on to India,
thence to Australia, and back over America. She had a personal interview
with the captain of the vessel, and insisted on all the games provided
for the use of passengers being turned out, so that she might assure
herself that no game of hazard was played on board. But as the entire
stock of entertainment consisted of some inglorious little rope-rings,
which were to be thrown into buckets, she felt no further anxiety on
this score. It puzzled her to understand how people could find amusement
in this, but the captain assured her that they did.

She saw Leonard off on a drizzly November morning. He was to be away at
the least for two years, and she parted from him with some emotion. But
the conviction that she was doing the wisest thing for him was a large
consolation. To let him go back to Rhodopé with all his inherited
instincts of gambling would be a dangerous experiment, for she was firm
in her resolve that he should prove a good and useful man, a ruler who
might be able to grapple with the insidious gambling disease which had
spread so direfully through the country, for she felt herself unable,
morally incapable, of dealing with it. Personally, she could not face
the idea of Amandos shorn of its club, and how should she, the priestess
of the goddess, recant? She was determined to give Leonard the best
chance possible. He should live on vessels where only rings were
provided for entertainment, and when he landed he should shoot animals,
and see mosques and wigwams, and other tedious and exotic objects.

She had engaged for him a tutor who inspired her with confidence. He had
a lofty, commanding forehead, with high, knobby temples and a pedantic
and instructive manner. He kept accounts in a book, and money in a
purse. She herself had tried to teach him picquet, and was delighted to
observe that he seemed almost incapable of understanding the ordinary
value of cards, though he was said to be a fine classical scholar. He
said he thought games of chance were irrational amusements, and though
in sheer loyalty she was bound to attempt to convince him they were not,
she was delighted to find that she failed egregiously. And next day
Sophia saw the s.s. _Valetta_ start from Tilbury, bearing Prince
Leonard, his tutor, and the little rope-rings out into the siren-haunted
mists of the mouth of the Thames.




CHAPTER XIII.

THE PLAGUE-SPOT SPREADS.


A few days afterwards Princess Sophia herself started on her return to
Rhodopé. The _Felatrune_ was to meet her at Monte Carlo, but she crossed
France overland. Her original scheme had been to go by sea all the way,
but this saving of time caused by crossing the Continent gave her a
balance of eight days, which she proposed to spend on the Riviera, where
she lost a good deal of money.

Even in the few months of her absence, the change which had come over
her mountain kingdom was startling. The crowd of foreign visitors,
chiefly English, had never been so great, nor the season so brilliant.
November in Rhodopé is the month of months, clear, cool, and bracing,
with a sun of heavenly purity, and a wind just _frappé_ with the snows
which have fallen on the higher ranges of the Balkan. The air has a
sparkle as if of frost in it, a translucent brightness which in the
North we associate with the white rime of autumn mornings. To the
Princess, fresh from the damp gray of England, and the tawdry theatrical
brilliance of the Riviera, her home seemed an enchanted place, and for
once she was glad to get back.

The club had pushed the limits of its gardens and kiosques up the slopes
of the hills behind Amandos; bandstands and boulevards were loud with
the orchestra and gay with colour. Even Monte Carlo seemed to her empty
and depopulated in comparison. But the place was changed in other ways.
The discipline of the army was relaxed; a Bill had been introduced in
the House, and passed without opposition, which abolished conscription,
and though the people were as picturesque as ever, they were infinitely
more idle. The demands for provisions and wines consequent on the
ever-increasing hosts of foreigners who flocked to the town had made
living easier than ever. A man could work two days a week where he had
worked six a few years ago, and yet find his earnings undiminished. It
had been necessary to limit the number of members of the club, and in
consequence a hundred other gaming-houses had been started, and deep
into the hours of the night shepherds and sailors watched the
roulette-marbles, which rolled as unceasingly as the stars of heaven.

Sophia was almost frightened at the success of the era she had
inaugurated, and she was truly shocked at the deterioration which
counterbalanced the increased prosperity. She had still, even in her
forty-first year, a strong love of keen eyes and fit limbs; her
admiration for a fine rider still warred with her respect for a bold
player, and she saw to her dismay that a nation of gamblers tends to
lose its grip of the saddle. The Life Guards were a mockery of horsemen;
they were growing pale and fat, and when they received her on the quay
of Mavromáti, she was horrified to observe that they were sleepy-eyed
and unerect--a regiment of putty soldiers. She herself, who could still,
as in the days when Petros came a-courting, watch the tide of gold
ebbing and flowing on the green tables for hour after hour when she
should have been asleep, without suffering for it next morning, saw that
if the common folk sat up at roulette all night, their parade on the
following day lost its briskness. But her regret passed; the town was
full of amusing people, and she had a series of house-parties with her
from November until the New Year fêtes were over. She was well
entertained, and as she was one of those to whom boredom is a pain more
exquisite than earache, she found that so long as it was entirely
absent, her mind was distracted from the consideration of the
deteriorated physique of her people.

Leonard’s letters also were full of consolation. They were so crammed
with excruciating facts about mosques and minarets that Sophia was
wholly incapable of reading them, and put the interminable sheets into
her desk, gratefully feeling that her experiment was brimming with
success. His tutor, she was informed, had fallen ill of typhoid at
Cairo, and Leonard was purposing to spend a month up the Nile while he
was recovering, a trip which he told her was well likely to repay a
visit. The pyramids of Sakkarah which he had just seen were magnificent
beyond description. As she knew, the Great Step Pyramid was there, a
magnificent structure of the Sixth Dynasty, while closer at hand were
the great pyramids of Gizeh, the tombs of Cheops, Chephren, and
Mycerinus, or Menkau, as he was more properly called. Archæologists were
disagreed as to the date of the Sphinx; for himself, he was inclined to
side with Mariette ... and Sophia murmured, ‘Dear boy!’ and read no
further, merely glancing at the last of the sixteen sides he had written
her, which contained an account of a usaptiu figure he had just
purchased from a dealer, which he had every reason to believe was
genuine, and not imported from Manchester for the ignorant tourist.

His next letter gave a most exhaustive historical account of the temple
of Karnak, and a description of the tombs of the kings, which he urged
his mother to see. In a few days she could get across to Port Said, and
a week afterwards they would be standing together lost in wonder at the
monuments of the Pharaohs. It was a liberal education, he said, to visit
Egypt; already in a few weeks he had learned more than his three years
at Eton had taught him. As a series, indeed, the letters really
resembled pages of a guide-book, so conscientious were they and so
unreadable. The next letter, after an interval of some six weeks, was
merely dated s.s. _Ammon_; but it described the holy city of Benares,
where there is a golden statue of Buddha twenty-five feet tall, the
alligators in the Hooghly, and the methods of the manufacturing of
filigree work. This was all as it should be, and Sophia’s belief in her
experiment became a creed with her. It no longer an experiment; it was
an assured success.

The spring passed into summer, and summer into autumn, and still Sophia
was deluged with floods of categorical information. Leonard had been
away a year, and the tutor, having successfully battled with typhoid in
Egypt, had unfortunately fallen a victim to yellow fever in the West
Indies. Leonard duly reported this to his mother, but declined
altogether to have another tutor. While the first lived he had
continually been tied in one place by his ailments, and he proposed to
do the rest of his journeying alone. He was now in Boston, U.S.A., where
there was a remarkably fine statue of George Washington; his mother
would doubtless recollect that this eminent statesman (one of the
brightest men the Western continent had ever produced) was notably
truthful. In fact, the story of his childhood, etc. He was now going an
excursion among some Indian tribes, and he hoped in his next to give
some account of wigwams, Yosemite, and squaws.

Sophia could not understand it. Was the boy going to grow up a pedant?
She almost preferred that he should be a gambler.

The Princess left Rhodopé that year in November, twelve months after
Leonard’s departure. Her _soi-disant_ visits to her relatives were
unusually protracted, for the tables constantly backed her luck, and it
was already May, the almond blossoms were over and the House was
sitting, when she returned to Amandos. She was beginning to get very
stout, but she found consolation for this in the advice of her doctor,
who recommended her a month at Carlsbad in the summer. That month
lengthened itself to six weeks, and on her arrival in Rhodopé again in
the autumn her neglect of her duties became more edifying than ever. For
one reason or another the visitors to the capital were much diminished
in this year; the death of her aunt, the Princess Olga, had thrown the
Court into mourning for a month, and time hung terribly on her hands.

It was during this enforced absence from the club, in obedience to
etiquette, but meaningless to her--for her aunt was one of the most
sour-tempered women God ever made, and mourning for her death was of a
farcical nature--that the Princess, in an excess of ennui, began those
practices which have been censured so severely, and which even the
indulgent historian must stigmatize as undignified. Night after night
she would steal out from one of the private doors of the palace, and,
disguised as well as might be like a widow, with a pair of spectacles, a
bombazine jacket, and a thick veil, make her way to one of the numerous
gaming-houses which held out their signs in every street in Amandos. For
fear she should be recognised, she dared not go to her own club, where
it would be certain she would meet someone she knew, and who knew her
well enough to pierce her somewhat transparent disguise; and for the
same reason she would not go to any of the houses frequented by the
upper class of her people. Instead, she would skulk along unfrequented
thoroughfares and narrow streets until she came to some sorry
restaurant, over which there would be a low, dingy room, ill ventilated,
and thick with the acrid fumes of inferior tobacco, and there she would
play perhaps for hours, in stakes limited to ten or twelve francs. In
this she would do violence to her better nature, for often the
roulette-boards were as pitiable as that which had so roused her anger
against Leonard, thus showing that they were contraband, and not
supplied by the Government monopoly; but gambling had become a necessity
to her, and she would have played with any wretch, however depraved, on
any board, however infamous. The pathos of the situation lay in the fact
that she was constantly recognised, but her loyal people, sympathizing
with her in being deprived of her games at the club, owing to this
meaningless etiquette, never gave a sign that they knew her. Certainly,
also, there was a curious attraction to her in the very squalor of the
surroundings. To be elbowed by hairy sailors, to be smothered in musk by
the wives of smaller tradesmen, excited her by its strange incongruity.
Lombroso, so she told herself, would certainly have diagnosed her
practices as belonging to one who showed the early stages of
egalo-megalomania, or some such mental deformation, but, as she also
told herself, nothing could matter less than what Lombroso said.

At other times she would even dine at the restaurants below, with a
secret gusto for the abominable food, and the sort of joy a miser must
feel, to know that in the palace her French chef was in the middle of
his inimitable alchemy, changing for her the raw material of his craft
into an artist’s dream. The daily risk of detection she ran at the hands
of her own servants even amused her, and she liked to see the blank,
masklike wonder of their faces when she told them that she would have
dinner at a quarter to eleven, little knowing that they were perfectly
aware what she was going to do in the interval. To her, gambling had
become as imperative as a dipsomaniac’s cravings, and the death of her
sour aunt made it a necessity to her to indulge her passion, as she
thought, secretly. It interested her also to find how much the secrecy
and squalor of these adventures resembled those of her remote cousin the
Empress Catherine of Russia. How strange a thing is heredity!

But the month of mourning passed, and she resumed her seat in the club.
Letters from Leonard still reached her, but she scarcely read them; and
though she loved the lad, and no sight would have been so welcome to her
as his face, yet she determined to keep him abroad as long as possible.
He had been away two years, and he would now be just twenty. He should
come back to Amandos to celebrate his twenty-first birthday, but if she
had her way, not a day before that.

Again the winter passed, again the seemingly interminable tedium of
business was suspended on the last day of December; again she thanked
her Ministers for their services to the country during the past year;
and as soon as the New Year festivities were over, she was off on the
new _Felatrune_, a yacht she had built with her winnings of the past
twelve months, for Monte Carlo. There her presence had become so regular
and assiduous, that the urbane manager had named one of the new rooms
the Princess’s Salon. She had a beautiful villa on the hills above the
town, which was generally full of guests; and while she was there this
room was reserved, unless she sent a message that she would not play
that day, for herself and her friends, but such days were few. It was
built at an angle of the Casino, and a little private lawn stretched
down in front of it to a terrace overlooking the sea. Crocuses, narcissi
and daffodils were sown all over the grass, and in the early spring it
used to look like a foreground of one of Fra Angelico’s pictures. Inside
the room was divinely appointed, but less like Fra Angelico’s pictures.
It was walled with crimson satin, and had a moulded gilt arabesque along
the top; the floor was of parqueted oak, with thick Persian rugs; on the
mantelpiece was a bronze doré clock by Vernier, which told the hours
unceasingly. On the right of the croupier’s place the Empress’s chair of
walnut wood, with little Sèvres plaques let into the arms; on the back
was inlaid her monogram underneath her crown.

The party with her was often enough to fill the room, for her house was
usually full of the orthodox; but when there was a place or so vacant,
the Princess would often stroll round the public rooms, and if she saw
there an acquaintance who played well, that is, high and with the
calmness of conviction, she would invite him to join her table. As a
rule her party would meet at her room for an hour or two before dinner,
adjourn again till half-past nine or so, and then continue the game till
two or three in the morning. Sometimes, when the roulette proved more
than usually exciting, and luck adorably capricious, it would be
prolonged to a later hour; and as the nights got shorter, it was no rare
thing for them to see morning break in thin lines of red on the eastern
horizon, and the dim dark change to an ethereal gray before they left
the Casino for the Princess’s villa.

For many weeks Sophia had had no word of any kind from Leonard, but as
his last letter had that he was going to shoot bears (_Ursa major_) in
the Rockies, she concluded, with all the enviable calm of a mind which
never knew anxiety, that where _Ursa major_ is plentiful, there also
postal arrangements are correspondingly scarce. Thus his continued
silence was scarcely noticeable to her, and, at any rate, she was so
happily constituted that no fear that bears had devoured him ever
occurred to her. When he came back from shooting bears, no doubt he
would write to her.

The month of April this year had been peculiarly seasonable; the lucid
atmosphere of summer had come, but not its heats; the freshness of
spring remained, but its armoury of squalls was spent, and seldom in her
life had the Princess enjoyed a more delectable score of days. Her
Ministers at Rhodopé, she was pleased to observe, at length entirely
understood her, and the completeness with which they indulged her
intolerance of State affairs was worthy of the Regency of Petros. She
was still, as in the days of her girlhood, a fervent lover of the sea,
and no morning failed to see her scudding up and down the coast in her
little cutter, and with the same regularity an hour before her déjeuner
she would be put ashore opposite her little tent on the beach, and have
a long swim before luncheon. No watering-place bather was she; her
bathing was no affair of a ducking of the head, a few random strokes,
and a bubbling cry. With a boat a hundred yards behind her, she would
swim out not less than half a mile from shore, rest a little, floating
with arms out-stretched in the rocking cradle of the waves, and then
head back for the shore. This exercise and the bracing water kept her
young, and while those only half her age would find but a rotten world
welcoming them to their lunch, after watching the dawn from the little
red room, hers was a brisk step, a feeling of slight well-earned
fatigue, a joyous elasticity of spirit, and the appetite of a youth.
She drank wine but sparingly, and in spite of her increasing stoutness,
she was still a woman to whom the eyes of men were drawn as steel to the
magnet, and none bore her years with half so good a grace as she.

But the early days of May brought straight the balance of imperfection
of this world and its weather. A stifling sirocco blew day after day out
of the south, bringing with it, you would have said, all the scorching
of the Libyan Desert and all the moisture of the sea it passed over. For
five days it blew without intermission, and on the morning of the fifth
the heat was rendered doubly intolerable by a great bank of ominous
clouds which spread eastwards over the sky at right angles to the
current of the wind. These were fat and fleecy, like blankets, and like
blanketed fever patients were those that stifled beneath them. Princess
Sophia alone was a shining exception to the rest of the limp world; she
had much enjoyed her buffeting with a gray and angry sea, and she
received her guests who collected in the drawing-room before lunch with
all her vivacious cordiality. Princess Aline of Luxemburg was one of
these, Prince Victor of Strelitz another; the rest were mainly English,
and all were gamblers of the most honourable order.

‘You call it a terrible day, Aline!’ cried the Princess. ‘My dear, what
do you know of the day? It may be delightful, for all you know. If I had
stayed in my bedroom as long as you, I should be dead by now. You
slept, or tried to sleep, till eleven.’

‘How do you know that?’ asked Princess Aline.

‘How? Because I was in the cutter--a very rough sea this morning--and it
so happened that my opera-glass was on the house. I saw a blind go up; I
knew it was the blind of your room. I looked at the time, and it was
eleven. Oh, why was I not a detective? What a series of simple and acute
deductions!’

‘Do you consider it a pleasant day, Sophia?’ asked her cousin, Prince
Victor.

‘Dear Victor, to me every day is a pleasant day, except in Rhodopé. How
is it possible to be more happy than I am? I have an admirable
digestion. Yes; is lunch ready? Let us come in. I have luck at the
cards. I slept for six hours like a tired child, as Shelley says. I have
swum a mile. I had no letters to worry me this morning, and my nation
has no history. Happy is the Princess whose nation has no history!’

‘The club, is not that history?’ asked Lady Blanche, who was of the
party.

‘A chapter only--a paragraph only. It cannot make history alone, and
positively nothing else has happened in Rhodopé for thirty years.’

‘Something nearly happened once,’ remarked Blanche.

‘Yes, dear Blanche, and you proved yourself my best and only friend, and
my worst enemy. Oh, I am not ungrateful; you know that. But think: if
only I had been deposed eighteen years ago, what garnered happiness had
been mine by now!’

The Princess’s admirable English, as usual, provoked a laugh, but she
scarcely paused to join in it herself.

‘Only think: for eighteen years I should have been a free woman--one of
those happy individuals whose luncheon-parties and whose tea-parties are
not recorded in the daily papers! Great Heaven! to be recorded in the
daily papers makes the happiness of some women. Yes, Blanche, but for
you I should have been one who does as she chooses. What nonsense is
that which we are told of free-will! For my class there is no such
thing. We do not wish or want or desire to go to lunch with the Mayor,
yet we go. On the other hand, Mayors are inevitable. What is supposed to
happen when free-will is opposed to that which is inevitable? Does no
one know? How ignorant!’

‘Be truthful, Sophia,’ said Princess Aline, ‘and tell me when last you
went to lunch with an inevitable Mayor.’

‘You are getting personal, Aline,’ said the other.

‘We will draw our conclusions, then.’

‘Dear Aline, draw what you like; the principle is the same. If I have
not been to lunch with a Mayor for as long as you choose to suppose, I
have vanquished the inevitable. If any of you had been in my place, you
would have lunched with the Mayor once every week-day, and twice on
Sundays.’

‘A day of rest,’ observed Blanche.

‘Yes, you would have slept afterwards,’ said Sophia. ‘Ouf! but it is
hot. The house is abominable on a day like this.’

After lunch they broke up again, Princess Aline announcing without shame
that she intended to lie on her bed and sleep, if possible, till tea.
Prince Victor, less honest, took a large chair in the veranda, and
pretended to read; but before long the book fell heavily to the ground,
and he snored without restraint. The others, with the exception of
Sophia and Blanche, said they were going to write letters, and the
Princess laughed at them.

‘Aline is the only honest one of you all,’ she said, ‘and Blanche and I
are the only people awake. Blanche, I ordered the horses for half-past
two; we will leave these shameless people. The view from the hills under
this great pall of cloud will be magnificent. See how near and distinct
everything has become! The wind has gone down; we shall have thunder. I
always win when it thunders.’

As Sophia had said, the wind had ceased, and the air hung as heavy as a
pall over the mountain-side. The noise of the sea filled the air, but
the waves no longer broke; a great thunderous, oily swell swept up to
the shore, and poured its volumes of water ponderously on the beach. Far
out to sea an ocean-going steamer was ploughing its way eastwards, and
as the swell caught and lifted her, they could see now the whole deck
slanted perilously towards them, and now she would be but a black line
in the trough of the sea. Overhead a mottled floor of cloud obscured
the sky, so lowering that it seemed almost within a stone’s-throw. The
olive-trees on the slope were unruffled by wind, and the very leaves of
the trees hung drooping as if sleeping uneasily. The horses were as if
tired by a long gallop, though they had not been out of the stables
except for exercising, and went heavily. Their riders alone seemed
unaffected by the weather, and their talk turned, as was not uncommon,
on the tables.

‘There seem to be rather fewer people here than usual,’ said the
Princess. ‘A few years ago May was always crowded.’

‘And now Amandos is crowded,’ remarked Lady Blanche.

‘Yes. How delightful not to be at Amandos! Blanche, I have sometimes
wondered--usually on Sunday evenings--whether it was really a good thing
for Rhodopé when I started the club. Of course, the wealth of the
country is enormously increased, but after all, has one not sacrificed
something else--the spirit of the land, the spirit of the mountains, and
the great out-of-doors?’

‘If you think so, restore it.’

‘I cannot,’ said Sophia--‘I simply cannot; Rhodopé without the tables
would be impossible to me. Oh, Blanche, why did you save my throne? I
almost wish I had received a polite note from Petros saying that the
Assembly had dethroned my House. Yet it was a great stroke, and I have
seldom been so excited as I was during that sledge-drive up from
Mavromáti, when we did not know if we should be in time. Dear me, how
splendidly punctual I was on that day! What a thunderstorm we had in
Corfu when I set out! The day was not unlike this afternoon.’

Blanche laughed.

‘Abdicate, then,’ she said. ‘Send for Prince Leonard to seat himself on
your throne.’

‘Ah, if he would only come! But I think he would be no better than I. He
was expelled from Eton, or rather I withdrew him, as you know, for
playing roulette.’

‘Do you think his travels may not have cured him?’ asked Lady Blanche.

‘How can one cure a passion? It is incurable. You may repress it, but it
is always there. True, I hope it is so much repressed that it will not
break out. Perhaps you may even call it cured. But what self-respecting
young man would banish himself to Rhodopé, especially one who has the
instinct for play, if there was no club?’

‘When will he be back?’ asked Blanche.

‘I don’t know. I have not heard from him for weeks. He was to shoot
bears, I think he said. It seems hardly worth while to go to America to
do that. Look how magnificent the view is! It was worth our while to
come.’

They got back about five o’clock, and after tea drove down to the
Casino. The rooms were very empty, and a restless, unsettled atmosphere
was abroad. Over the sea from time to time came blinks of remote
lightning, and rumblings of thunder, like the sound of a gong very far
away. Even roulette somehow seemed monotonous, in such poor spirits were
the Princess’s guests, and it was a relief to her when dinner-time came,
for there was no such tonic to the mind as dinner.

As they dined, the storm moved nearer, and while they drank their coffee
on the terrace, they watched a continuous play of violet-coloured
lightning southwards over the sea, and the noise of the thunder began to
overscore the hoarse voice of the swell on the beach below. A few drops
of rain, warm and large, splashed down on the terrace like sudden frogs,
and the tension of the atmosphere grew unbearable. Even Sophia felt it.

‘Something is going to happen,’ she cried, as they entered the Casino
doors--‘something is going to happen fit for the lightning to look at
and the thunder to listen to. I am excited! I am delightfully excited!’




CHAPTER XIV.

BANG!


The world seemed to have stopped at home that night, and in the large
room--a thing Sophia had never known before--there was no one playing.
The croupiers were all at their posts, some of them idly spinning the
wheels, or dealing right and left for imaginary trente et quarante; but
the visitors, perhaps only twenty in all, were lounging by the open
windows, silently watching the gathering of the storm. Due south, and
far over the sea, a terrific thunderstorm was going on; to the west, a
separate and distinct display winked and grumbled. Both storms were
certainly moving nearer; it was as if the elements were banded together
for the destruction of Monte Carlo, and the whole world seemed to be
waiting, finger on lip, for an imminent judgment. The air was windless,
but every few minutes a sudden gust swept rattling and hissing across
the garden, some outlying feeler, cast down like a grappling-iron from a
balloon, of the fearful tumult that was raging fathoms overhead. In such
a way seaweed and ooze feel the suck of a swell above, stir and wave
madly through the translucent water, and are still again.

Close to the window near where they entered the large room a very tall
figure of a man lounged against the wall, his face averted. Over it--no
uncommon sight--was tied a black domino, for the more finished gamblers
of that day--gamblers, that is, of the first water, who cultivated
style--often concealed their faces in this way, for fear that some
ungovernable seizure of the muscles might declare their emotion.
Princess Sophia had often talked this curious custom over with Blanche.

‘It is a ridiculous invention,’ she said, ‘for the involuntary and
ungovernable spasms of emotion are betrayed, not by the face, but by the
hands. I, as you know, have had some experience of the table, and though
no one--this sounds hardly modest, but it is true--can conceal their
excitement better than I, I cannot always check little sudden movements
of the fingers. The muscles of my face I have in perfect control. There
is no difficulty. It is a mask; but if you watch my third and fourth
fingers, you will see them, if I am more than usually interested in the
game, make little movements which I simply cannot control. It is hardly
a movement, it is more a vibration; and to conceal this, as you have
noticed, I sometimes wear dark gloves at the tables.’

They passed on into their private room, where Pierre--he always left
Rhodopé with the Princess--was awaiting them. Even he seemed touched by
the weather, and his bow lacked briskness, and his moustache looked
limp.

‘Pierre, Pierre, this will never do!’ cried Sophia. ‘We are all like old
rags in this weather, and we need more players. Let us have all the
windows open; we shall soon have to shut them. Yet in the other
room--no, no one is playing. Whom can we get? Is not the lightning
amazing!’

‘There are some good players there, your Royal Highness, though no one
is playing yet,’ said Pierre--‘a tall man, for instance, in a black
domino.’

‘Yes, I saw him,’ said the Princess. ‘He even bowed to me as I came in,
which is impertinent of a stranger.’

‘He bowed to the Queen of Monte Carlo, madam,’ said Pierre, brisking up
a little, for Sophia always stimulated him, ‘not to the Princess of
Rhodopé.’

The Princess laughed.

‘But he wears a domino,’ she said; ‘he must be a bad gambler if he
cannot control his face.’

‘Watch his hands, madam,’ returned Pierre; ‘they are as if of ice.’

‘Then, why does he wear a domino?’

‘Perhaps to conceal some deformity, poor gentleman!’ said Pierre, ‘or
perhaps he has the dance of St. Vitus. Your Royal Highness will find he
plays well.’

‘Ask him to come in, then,’ she said, ‘and ask three others; we are
short to-night.’

Pierre hurried into the other room to do her bidding, and a moment
afterwards returned with the desired number. It was considered a sort
of brevet rank among card-players to join the Princess’s table, and her
requests were always eagerly obeyed. Last of the four came the Black
Domino, and as the Princess bowed to him, ‘Your Royal Highness will be
so kind as to excuse my domino,’ he said; ‘it is a practice of mine to
wear it.’

‘And gloves?’ asked the Princess, with interest.

‘No, madam; I have my hands under control,’ he replied.

‘That is odd,’ said she. ‘My face I have under control, you shall see,
but occasionally I have to wear gloves.’

Princess Aline was not gifted by nature with the best of temper, and for
the first hour she had certainly the worst of luck. Eight times she
betted limit stakes on the second half-dozen--no mean form of play--and
seven times she lost. The limit was one hundred napoleons, and the seven
rolls were expensive. At the end of the seventh she lost her temper as
well as her stake, and in a spasm of irony quite ineffectual against
inanimate objects she laid two sous with much asperity on the same
half-dozen, although the lowest stake was understood to be a napoleon;
but her bet was addressed, not to the company, but to the offending
marble. This time, of course, she won, and in a fit of rage she hurled
the innocuous penny-piece which Pierre had hastily fished out of his
pocket on to the floor.

The Black Domino, who was seated next her, pushed back his chair, and
picked it up for her.

‘I think this slipped from the hand of your Serene Highness,’ he said
gravely, and with such suavity and seriousness of tone that none thought
to laugh.

The Princess meantime, as she so often was accustomed to do when
beginning a night’s play, trifled and coquetted with Luck, to see in
what mood the goddess was, as some _gourmet_ who is ordering his dinner
will sit over the choice of dishes with an olive or a glass of bitters,
testing the quality and leanings of his appetite. She bet a napoleon or
two on a single number once or twice, and lost; she bet on a few
half-dozens, and lost also; she even bet occasionally on the colour, but
Luck seemed to have turned its back on her. These insignificant
triflings gave her time to observe the Black Domino, and before long her
candour told her that Luck had been right to leave her. If she was, as
Pierre said, the Queen of Monte Carlo, here indeed was the King. The
domino, of course, concealed his face; but, even as Pierre had said, his
hands might have been of ice. He seemed to stake nothing lower than the
limit, and he never staked on more than a half-dozen. Once, when he had
bet on a single number, she noticed he had just lit a match for his
cigarette, and his hand was half raised, the elbow off the table, when
the marble, as sometimes happens, after some few wild dashes backwards
and forwards, began to slow down very suddenly. Watching it, he forgot
to light his cigarette, and though his arm was unsupported, she saw his
white fingers cut like a cameo across his black coat, and the edge
never wavered. She grew so interested in watching him that more than
once she forgot to stake on a roll, to the extreme amazement of all
present, including herself.

After an hour or two Pierre went to get his supper, and in the momentary
pause before the new croupier took his place she leaned forward across
the table.

‘Let me have the honour of complimenting you on your play,’ she said to
the Black Domino; ‘it is perfection, and I have seen a good deal of
play.’

The man bowed.

‘Praise from the Princess Sophia is praise indeed,’ he said. ‘You see,
your Royal Highness, I make it a rule never to get up a loser; that
gives one a certain calmness. One only has to play long enough.’

She laughed.

‘A good rule,’ she said. ‘Your methods are the same as my own. It will
come to a duel between us.’

‘That shall be as your Royal Highness pleases,’ he said.

Prince Victor was of that imbecile type of gambler which is usually
known as the prudent; in other words, after having lost a specified sum,
he closed his performances for the evening. This consummation he usually
attained after about three hours’ hesitating and inglorious adventure;
but this evening his rate of progress was somewhat more advanced, and he
rose from the table shortly before midnight. On the stroke of the clock,
without warning, the two battalions of storm burst overhead; a wicked
flicker of lightning zigzagged across the darkness close outside the
room where they were playing, and simultaneously, it seemed, a crack of
thunder so appalling burst above them that even the Princess, who seldom
showed emotion, half rose from her seat with a little cry of fright.
Princess Aline buried her face in her hands; Pierre, who had returned
from his supper, cried ‘Mon Dieu!’ in a trembling voice and crossed
himself; the Black Domino alone remained perfectly unmoved.

‘Your Royal Highness should recollect,’ he said to Sophia, ‘that when
one has heard the thunder it is proof-positive that one has not been
struck by the lightning. I am quite sure we all heard the thunder.
Personally, I am deafened; my ears sing. I see no has staked on this
roll.’

Shortly after one Princess Aline got up rather hastily from the table.
She said something in a loud, angry tone; but her words, luckily
perhaps, were drowned by a prodigious explosion overhead. Outside the
rain was falling like a shower of lead, and now and then a lightning
flash crossing the black square of the windows would turn the water into
a deluge of prismatic colour. Already the air was cooler, but the
chariots of God still drove backwards and forwards over their very
heads. As Aline left the table, the Black Domino asked for a
whisky-and-soda, and Princess Sophia put on her gloves; for her hands
trembled perceptibly, and her little finger made strange twitching
movements. The Black Domino must already have made a fortune, and
Princess Sophia thought with dismay that her Civil list would not be
paid till September, and she was not very good at economizing.

On the retirement of Aline and Victor, the Princess had sent out for two
others to take their places; but when at three o’clock Blanche also
rose, she sent in vain for another. Play had ceased in the large room,
and there was positively no one there. Half an hour afterwards two
others got up, and the Princess, looking round the table, saw that
weariness sat on all faces.

She rose at once.

‘Do not let me detain you, ladies and gentlemen, if any of you wish to
go,’ she said. ‘I am infinitely obliged to you for your charming
company. The storm, I think, is passing over; you can get to your hotels
without a drenching. Good-night--I wish you all a very good-night.’

A sigh of relief went round the room--for it was not etiquette to leave
the Princess’s table, except for her intimates, till she herself
suggested it--and all rose. The Black Domino, however, lingered.

‘Am I to understand that your Royal Highness is willing to go on playing
with any who wish to remain?’ he asked.

Sophia flushed with delight.

‘_Mon cher inconnu_,’ she cried, ‘you are inimitable! But what game
shall we play? It will have to be a game for two. I will cut you through
fifty packs.’

‘I would as soon play old maid, begging your Royal Highness’s pardon,’
observed the Black Domino with some heat.

‘Bezique?’ suggested Sophia.

‘Surely that is more a game for Ash Wednesdays, your Royal Highness,’
said he.

‘Suggest, then,’ she said; ‘only I will not play trente et quarante. No
doubt I am unreasonable, but it bores me; and I entirely refuse to be
bored. After all, roulette is the only game worth playing; but we can’t
play roulette with two.’

‘I think it might be managed,’ said the Black Domino, ‘if the bank will
stand aside and let us fight it out.’

‘How do you propose to manage it?’ she asked.

‘In this way. One of us--say whichever of us won the last roll--stakes
on a number, or on six numbers, or a dozen, or on the colour. The other
then stakes, but may not stake on more numbers than the first has staked
on. Thus, if your Royal Highness stakes on a dozen, I may stake on a
dozen or anything less than a dozen. In the same way, if I, staking
first, back colour merely, your Royal Highness may stake on colour, on
the dozen, on anything down to one number. If I, again, stake on one
number, your Royal Highness must stake on one. Thus, if you stake on one
number to my dozen and win, I pay you twelve times your stake. If we
both stake on a dozen and you win, I pay you your stake only. It will
not be roulette, but it should not be tedious.’

Sophia turned to Pierre.

‘Will it make a game?’ she asked.

Pierre wiped an excited dew from his forehead.

‘I would my father were alive to see it!’ he exclaimed piously. ‘Madam,
it is the greatest gamble conceivable! Heaven will not be found to hold
such a gamble.’

‘That is probably the case,’ said Sophia dryly.

They sat down again, and at the Princess’s request the Black Domino spun
a coin.

‘Heads!’ she cried; and it was heads.

Sophia intended to begin gently till she saw the run of the game, and
staked five napoleons on red.

‘Black,’ replied her opponent, and lost.

Sophia hesitated.

‘Red,’ she said--‘limit. I think this will make an amusing game.’

‘On number thirteen, limit,’ replied this remarkable young man.

Sophia held her breath. Hardened gambler as she was, she always let
thirteen severely alone, and she heard her pulse hammering in her throat
as the ball clicked and flew off at tangents. Long before it stopped she
had a presentiment what would happen, and when it paused, ran on again,
slowed and died, dropping into thirteen, she was not surprised.

‘I congratulate you,’ she said with entire truth, and handed him sixteen
times the limit stake.

For the next half-hour after this the play was only moderately
sensational. They staked on dozens and half-dozens, occasionally even on
colour, and the Black Domino continued to make a handsome income. About
four o’clock he yawned slightly, and it being Sophia’s turn to stake,
when she backed a colour, he wearily laid down the limit stake of a
hundred napoleons on number twenty.

‘My age,’ he said.

‘Indeed!’ remarked Sophia. ‘You look older;’ and her voice vibrated with
suppressed emotion.

The ball slowed down. Again he had won on a single number to her
sixteen.

At this she grew a little reckless; but do what she would, her own
recklessness seemed to fade into a pallid system by his; the fire of her
play dwindled like a candle in sunlight before his extraordinary
hazards, and yet his hands might have been hands of ice.

Only once again before the pale face of the dawn began to peer in at the
eastern window did they pause, and that when Pierre rose to walk up and
down the room, for he was cramped with sitting. Then for the first and
only time in her life the Princess showed herself inquisitive.

‘I should be honoured by knowing your name,’ she said.

‘With your Royal Highness’s permission I will keep it to myself till we
have finished,’ he replied. ‘But I have on my side a question. Shall we,
with your Royal Highness’s permission, place no limit on the stakes?
These hundred napoleon stakes are getting a little tedious, are they
not? We are used to them, and when one gets used to a thing it is better
to change it.’

Now, most men when they have won a fortune would absolutely refuse to
raise the stakes, and the Princess raised her hands in amazement. Never
had her wildest imaginations pictured a gambler so magnificent as this.
What a king, she thought, he would have made! He was royal--a man out of
sight of the run of humanity, as kings should be. None but she could so
well have appreciated his extraordinary self-control, none could have so
estimated his scale.

‘My limit shall only be that of which I am possessed,’ she said. ‘I have
still six thousand napoleons to lose, but I am afraid I have no more.’

The black Domino separated from his pile of winnings sixty rouleaux of a
hundred napoleons.

‘The night is already gone,’ he said. ‘I will stake on red.’

‘And I on black,’ said the Princess; and her little finger twitched like
the indicator of a telegraph.

The ball slowed down, and she rose.

‘I would play with you till the Day of Judgment,’ she said, ‘but
positively I have not a penny till my Civil List is paid in September.’

‘Your Royal Highness has Rhodopé,’ said he.

‘True; and what shall be your stake?’

‘The revenues of Rhodopé, paid year by year to you and your heirs for
ever.’

‘They are large, and “for ever” is a long time.’

‘And I am rich. Also I have luck. I will stake on the first half of the
board.’

‘And I on the second,’ said the Princess; but her voice was a whisper.

Pierre’s hand so trembled that he could scarce set the wheel in motion,
and the Princess’s foot beat an electric dynamo on the thick Persian rug
underneath the table. The spin was a long one, but at last the ball
began to slow down; it crept through one to sixteen, crawled through
sixteen to thirty-two, wavered over zero, and settled into number one.
They rose together.

‘A pleasant jest,’ said the Princess rather tremulously, ‘to end a
memorable evening.’

‘I never jest when I am gambling,’ said the Black Domino. Then he drew
himself up and removed his domino. ‘Is it possible you do not recognise
me, mother?’ he said.

The Princess’s hands made a sudden quick movement together.

‘Oh, Leonard! Leonard!’ she cried; ‘when you ought to have been among
the wigwams! How tiresome of you!’

‘Even so, but I preferred, like you, to be at Monte Carlo. I have been
here two months, and I have played every day since I saw you last. The
rest of my time was occupied in copying pages out of guidebooks.’

Sophia could not restrain herself. She threw her arms round his neck and
embraced him, kissing him on both cheeks.

‘But you are magnificent!’ she cried. ‘I never thought the world
contained so splendid a man! And how you have grown! I left you a
little boy, now you look a man of twenty.’

‘I am nearly twenty-one,’ he said.

‘Yes, you must be. How time flies! Leonard, how can you keep your hands
still? You shall teach me.’

‘It is practice, and natural predisposition to keep quiet at the
tables,’ he said. ‘I inherited the second from you, dear mother, and I
have had a good deal of the other on my own account.’

Pierre--and he should have been given a medal for the act--had seen that
this was no interview for him to witness, and, as the others had
forgotten his presence, he went softly and discreetly out of the room.
For a moment there was silence. Then Leonard said:

‘I wonder if you realize what you have done, mother.’

‘What do you mean?’

‘You have staked Rhodopé and lost it.’

The Princess sat down heavily in a chair. Her emotion dazed her.

‘Leonard, you can never do it,’ she said. ‘My poor boy, you would die in
a month at Rhodopé. You would beggar the principality in a night, and a
week after you would be dead of boredom. No, it is too great a
sacrifice! I will not accept it. To-morrow I shall go back to Rhodopé. I
will banish myself there, and never play again. I have perfection, and
that is you, and I am content. I have seen my ideal. Besides, I am a
beggar.’

‘I insist on your paying me your debt,’ said Leonard. ‘You have
abdicated. I am Hereditary Prince of Rhodopé. You shall come to Rhodopé
to-morrow, and say farewell to your people; but after that you shall not
come to Rhodopé again, and I think you will not care to. I have played
my last stake. I shut up every gambling-house in the principality,
otherwise we shall be the mock of Europe; and I will not be Prince of a
country that is one roulette-board.’

The Princess sprang up.

‘You mean it, Leonard?’ she said. ‘You will do what I have been unable
to do? You will save Rhodopé? Oh, but you cannot--you cannot! Think what
you are: how young; how many glorious nights of play may lie before
you!’

‘I am going to do as I said,’ he replied.

The Princess embraced him again.

‘And I shall never see Rhodopé any more,’ she cried. ‘Oh, merciful
heavens! how happy I am! But I will go with you and say farewell, and
then I will come back to Monte Carlo for ever and ever. I will wear a
lace cap at Rhodopé, and shed real tears. I will invoke all kinds of
blessings and that sort of thing on everybody. The poor Princess
abdicates because of the burden of State; she leaves the burden on the
shoulders of her dear son. The laws of dramatic propriety make me go to
Rhodopé once more. Oh, Leonard, although I was determined that you
should shake off this fatal habit of gambling, I thought but poorly of
you when I imagined you were taking an interest in mosques and wigwams;
but they answered their purpose, you naughty boy! Those letters you
wrote me the acme of absurdity. You shall tell me all your adventures
to-morrow. Come! let us get home; it is day.’




EPILOGUE.


It was my fortune, two years ago, while drifting about the Continent, to
be passing through the Riviera on my way to Greece, and, happening to
spend a night at that very pretty place Monte Carlo, it was not unnatural
that I went to take a look--no more--at the tables. After that it was
easier of demonstration than the first proposition of Euclid that I laid
a few francs on a half-dozen of numbers, and, oddly enough, I won. Just
as the marble slowed down, though I was too intent on it to raise my
eyes, I saw that a little stir of attentive movement was going about the
room, and after receiving my stake with a studied negligence--the right
pose, so I am told, at tables--I looked up. Close beside me was standing
a very large lady, with four of the most magnificent ropes of pearls I
have ever seen round her neck. She smiled affably, and with a most
charming graciousness.

‘Please continue,’ she said; ‘you have yet time to stake on this roll.’

I at once guessed who this great jewelled lady was, and in some
confusion of mind laid a napoleon at haphazard on the board.

The instant after the croupier set the wheel going, and I was struck
with consternation, though not naturally superstitious, to observe that
the number I had chosen to back was thirteen.

In the room there was dead silence, and looking up, I saw the Princess’s
eyes glued to the table. This, as I soon observed, was a habit with that
remarkable woman. The play of others she would watch as if her last
franc was at stake; when she played herself, it was as if she staked a
sixpence. Round and round went the marble, clicking and whirring; it
slowed down, and I had won.

‘My dear young man,’ said the Princess, ‘I shall be delighted to know
your name, and to receive you in my little private room to-night; I have
a small party with me.’

I willingly made the Princess the present of my name, but regretted that
circumstances over which I had no control made it absolutely impossible
for me to play for the stakes she was accustomed to risk. She scarcely
seemed to hear what I said.

‘Come,’ she said; ‘we will begin at once. I only want one extra
to-night, as we are a houseful.’

Now, by nature I am a profound loyalist, and hold heads which are
crowned, or have once been crowned, in a fervour of respect. To refuse
to obey a royal command seemed to me a thing undreamed of, but to play
with the Princess was dipped in an equal impossibility. As we entered
the Princess’s room, again I explained the meanness of my position. She
looked at me compassionately.

‘How much are you prepared to lose?’ she asked. ‘I mean, till you had
lost what sum, would you have remained in the Casino?’

I told her the meagre total.

‘Well, come and lose it with me,’ she said, ‘instead of in there. My
room is far more comfortable, and you may smoke, of course.’

Now I disapprove of gambling, especially for those who, like myself,
cannot afford it. I had been caught, like Dr. Jekyll, tampering with my
conscience, and Nemesis, in the person of the Princess, had come swift
and stout. I resigned myself, I dare to hope, with a fair grace, and
after the Princess had mentioned my name vaguely to a host of royalties,
laying little stress on it, but much stress on the fact that she had
seen me win on a single number, and that thirteen, we sat down. The
situation reminded me of the ‘Rose and the Ring.’ The room was full of
royalty, and my impression was that I was the only uncrowned head
present. I felt myself the apotheosis of obscurity.

However, there was no help for it, and feeling that I had better curtail
the evening as much as possible, but maintain the reputation of
recklessness, I proceeded to stake on single numbers, or on two or three
at a time, never backing more than six. Whether it was that the Goddess
of Luck was fairly astounded by the sudden recantation of an apostate,
or whether the powers that be wished to make up to me the missing of a
train the day before, I do not know, but the fact remains that I simply
could not lose. Pierre’s eyes were bright with admiration, and soon from
handing me my stake with a ‘Monsieur,’ he gave me rank as ‘votre
altesse.’

The clock by Vernier on the bracket seemed to me never to stop striking.
Hardly had one hour died in the air than the next was on the chime. I
was lost to the nimble passing of the time, and I remember but little of
the next few hours, except that the heap of gold by me grew like Alice
when she ate the mushroom. Hardly a word was exchanged by anyone, but I
recollect, just as the clock struck twelve, looking at my hands. For the
moment I thought I had an ague. I was sitting next the Princess, and she
too observed them.

‘There, there!’ she said, as if soothing a child, ‘it may happen to any
of us. Your face is all right. But send for a pair of gloves, if you
have none with you. What is your size? A large eight, I should say.
Pierre, procure some gloves--large eight--for this gentleman. Send one
of my footmen. I often wear gloves myself, and I think I shall put them
on now. I am a little excited. We are having a charming evening!’

One o’clock struck, and we adjourned for supper. As we rose I suddenly
realized that the excitement had made me ravenous, though till then I
had not been conscious of the slightest hunger. The experience, I
believe, is a common one.

We supped in one of the restaurants in the Casino, and I was assailed
with questions. Why had I not been seen here before? or was it that I
played at other tables only? What was the largest sum I had ever won?
and what did I really _entre amis_--(was not that gratifying!)--think
about number thirteen? It was in vain that I pleaded I was no gambler,
that I had no ideas whatever about the number thirteen, except that when
thirteen sat down to dinner they usually all lived for more than a year
afterwards. I was listened to with polite incredulity. I had not known
that crowned heads were so slow of belief. Princess Sophia, I think,
alone credited me with speaking the truth, for she said (and
subsequently explained what she meant):

‘At first I thought that you were like poor Petros, when he said that he
was but a beginner at bezique, but I think I was wrong.’

After an interval of half an hour we went back to the tables. If I had
been lucky before, I was Luck incarnate now. The thing was absurd and
ridiculous. I won so regularly that it became almost monotonous. For
more than an hour I consistently played limit stakes, and still the
rouleaux of gold poured in. I had recovered my nerve, and did not again
put on the large eights, which fitted me exactly, and from opposite I
saw the Princess looking at me with a wistful air.

‘It reminds me so of a night I spent with poor Leonard,’ she said, half
to herself, as for the hundredth time her stake was swept away to join
my winnings.

We left the tables at half-past three, and though I had meant to stop at
Monte Carlo only one night more, I found it impossible to go. In fact, I
engaged myself to lunch at the Princess’s villa next day, and be of her
party again in the evening.

The details of the play during the next few evenings would be tedious to
relate. It will suffice to say that Luck turned her back on me, and
though she could not quite efface the result of her first favours, I am
still not in a position to play roulette for large sums. In fact, I have
only introduced this little episode to explain how it was that I became
acquainted with the Princess, who told me the afore-written history of
her life, and graciously suggested that I should make a little book of
it.

‘For, indeed,’ she said, ‘my adventures seem to me not uninteresting.
Perhaps that is only my egotism, but I do not think so. And as you are
going away to-morrow--to Greece, I think you said?--I will finish the
story of which I have told you a part, and mention what happened to
Leonard after that memorable night at Monte Carlo when I gambled for
Rhodopé and lost.’

She sighed.

‘Poor dear Leonard!’ she said; ‘that was his _tour de force_, his fine
moment. He never came near it again. It is sad to me to think what a
mess people make of their lives. Some are born to one thing, some to
another; he was certainly born to be a gambler, but an adverse fate,
like the seventh godmother in the fairy-tales, gave him a terrible
gift. She made him Prince of Rhodopé, and endowed him with a mania for
reformation. I call him Luther sometimes.’

‘But surely you can hardly regret what he has done!’ I said. ‘Has he not
made a power of Rhodopé?’

She shook her head sadly.

‘He has only done what any obstinate, stupid, and excellent man could
have done,’ she said. ‘I will not argue that it is a better thing to be
a gambler than a reformer, but when you are born a gambler, it is silly
to devote your life to reforming. Sometimes, when I think of the parable
of the ten talents, I wonder----’ She broke off. ‘Well, for my story,’
she said, after a pause. ‘It is very short--just the sequel of what I
have already told you--but English people, I think, like a story to be
finished up, and to know that the hero lives happily ever afterwards,
and it will do for a little epilogue. In this case, it is certainly true
that Leonard has lived happily ever afterwards, for, indeed, he is quite
content. He has married, as you know, and he has five children, none of
whom have ever a pack of cards, and they are all the pictures of health,
and go to bed at nine. My dear young man, think what that means. It is
horrible! The Education Department ought to see to it. But in Rhodopé,
unfortunately, I doubt whether even the Education Department know what
cards are now. Dear me, how things have changed! Poor Leonard!

‘Yet he is content,’ she went on. ‘He has a magnificent army, and I
really believe he will make a great power of Rhodopé. When the Turkish
Empire is broken up, you will see he will get a great slice. And the
people adore him. They think he is the wisest, most Christian, and most
enlightened of monarchs, and I am afraid that if Leonard lives long--and
he is sure to live long, because he always goes to bed at half-past ten,
and gets up at a quarter past seven--oh, that quarter past!--he may get
to believe it, too. That would be a great pity. Humility is the first
duty of a crowned head, and if the German Emp---- Well, I suppose I had
better not say that.’

‘Please do,’ said I.

She shook her head.

‘No, you must not put that into your book. Say I stopped just in time;
it will make people think how discreet I am, and, indeed, it is true.
But to return to Leonard. He shut up every gambling-house in Rhodopé; he
even stopped knuckle-bones. As I told you, he had a bonfire of all the
roulette-boards, and gradually he made Rhodopé what it is. He has a
passion for doing his duty--an acquired passion, I admit, but still a
passion. It is a very common passion nowadays, and you English have got
it worse than anyone. You are all too good, and in consequence, as a
nation, you are just a little dull.’

‘I don’t think that is the result of our goodness,’ I said, for, like
Stevenson, I hate cynicism like the devil.

‘Pardon me,’ said the Princess, with some asperity, ‘but I know it is. I
like people to be good, when being good comes natural to them; but the
continual effort to do one’s duty is paralyzing to other energies. You
get developed incompletely. Also, the continual doing of one’s duty
makes one all nose or all forehead, or something disproportionate. You
have not time to be gay. Good gracious! there is the dressing-gong! I
must go, so good-bye. I am sorry you cannot play with us to-night, but I
think you said you were engaged. I have written to Leonard to say you
will go to Amandos after your visit to Athens, and I have not told him
you play roulette, or he would refuse to see you. Good-bye, and a
prosperous voyage. If you should get away from your dinner early, you
will find us at the tables, I expect. A little roulette would be
pleasant, I think, for a change. The large eight gloves, which I see you
have left on the table, I shall keep by me. When the madness is on me,
and I want to stake on thirteen, they ought to bring me luck.’


                               THE END.

                   *       *       *       *       *

                                  THE

                  NELSON LIBRARY OF COPYRIGHT NOVELS.

              _Uniform with this Volume and Same Price._

                        _A Few Recent Volumes._


     SIR GEORGE TRESSADY. Mrs. Humphry Ward. “Sir George Tressady” is
     Mrs. Humphry Ward’s best romance of high politics. It is a story of
     a young member who is gradually won to Democratic ideas by the
     influence of a great lady--the “Marcella” of the earlier novel. It
     is a powerful study of the development of a fine character. The
     last chapters must remain as of the finest episodes in modern
     fiction.

     ROMANCE. Joseph Conrad and F. M. Hueffer. “Romance,” which Mr.
     Joseph Conrad wrote in collaboration with Mr. F. M. Hueffer, is a
     story of the Spanish Main, and of the strange adventures of the
     young Kentish gentlemen among the old Spanish cities of the West.
     The story does not belie its title, for the very soul of romance
     breathes in every chapter.

     LADY ROSE’S DAUGHTER. Mrs. H. Ward. In this remarkable novel Mrs.
     Humphry Ward has worked the life story of the famous Mademoiselle
     de Lespinasse into a modern setting. It is a study of modern
     society and high politics, and against this glittering background
     we have a very original and charming love story.

WAR OF THE CAROLINAS.-----Meredith Nicholson.

     Mr. Meredith Nicholson has acquired a great reputation in America
     by works like “The House of the Thousand Candles,” in which the
     threads of romance are woven into the fabric of everyday life. The
     present book is pure comedy. It is the story of two friends who
     find themselves, unknown to each other, assisting on opposite sides
     in a war between the two daughters of the Governors of the
     Carolinas.

KATHARINE FRENSHAM.-----Miss Beatrice Harraden.

     Miss Harraden, many years ago, made her reputation by “Ships that
     Pass in the Night” as a delicate and subtle portrayer of human life
     and an accomplished artist in feminine psychology. Without any
     cheap emotional appeal she has an unequalled power of attracting
     the attention and winning the affections of her readers. “Katharine
     Frensham” is an admirable example of this gift, and all lovers of
     sincere and delicate art will welcome it.

FIRST MEN IN THE MOON.-----H. G. Wells.

     This is a good example of Mr. Wells’s scientific romance at its
     best. It is a story of the first landing of mortals in the moon; of
     the strange land they found there, the strange government, and the
     strange people. It is a nightmare, but one without horror. Mr.
     Wells’s imagination has created out of wild shapes and figments a
     world which has got an uncanny reality of its own. The story grips
     the reader in the first chapter and carries him swiftly to the end.

PROFESSOR ON THE CASE.-----Jacques Futrelle.

     Mr. Jacques Futrelle has attained in America, by his detective
     stories, something of the reputation of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle in
     this country. He has created a figure as original and wonderful as
     Sherlock Holmes. The Professor is a devotee of pure logic, and by
     acting on the principle that two and two always make four, is able
     to elucidate the most baffling mysteries.

LOVE AND THE SOUL HUNTERS. J. O. Hobbes.

     The late Mrs. Craigie had a unique place among modern writers. She
     combined a brilliant wit and a remarkable gift of epigram with the
     mysticism of the spiritual life; a union of qualities of which we
     find traces in Disraeli’s best novels, and “Love and the Soul
     Hunters” is a typical example of her gifts.

SECRET OF THE LEAGUE.-----Ernest Bramah.

     The publishers have much pleasure in presenting this brilliant
     novel in a cheap form in the hope that it may secure a wide
     popularity. It was first published some years ago under the title
     of “What Might Have Been,” but the author has since considerably
     revised and remodelled it. It is a study of the future of our
     politics under a Socialistic régime. It tells how the middle and
     upper classes were crushed under a dead weight of taxation; how a
     great league was formed to combat the evil; and how victory was won
     by a device which is at once ingenious and convincing. In the
     French phrase it gives the reader furiously to think, and even
     those who differ from the author’s forecast will delight in the
     stirring narrative and the many passages of trenchant satire.

VALERIE UPTON.-----Miss A. D. Sedgwick.

     This is a study of one type of the American young woman, who, with
     the phrases of self-sacrifice and idealism always upon her lips, is
     radically cold-hearted and selfish. It is a brilliant character
     study, and the repellent figure of the daughter is relieved by the
     gracious character of her mother--a character which is in many ways
     one of the most subtle and attractive in modern fiction.

FARM OF THE DAGGER.-----Eden Phillpotts.

     Dartmoor is as much Mr. Phillpotts’s own country by right of
     conquest as the Scottish Borders were Sir Walter Scott’s, and
     Exmoor the late Mr. R. D. Blackmore’s. The present tale deals with
     the time of the American War and the early years of the nineteenth
     century. It is the study of a feud between neighbours; a grim story
     of passion, relieved by a charming love tale. The atmosphere of the
     moors is wonderfully rendered, and the men and women of the tale
     have borrowed from their environment a kind of spacious strength.
     It is also a record of action and adventure, and combines the
     merits of a novel of character with those of a fine romance.

EXPENSIVE MISS DU CANE.-----S. Macnaughtan.

     This is a comedy of a country house in which a number of
     present-day types appear, drawn with admirable insight and a touch
     of kindly irony. There is tragedy in the tale, but tragedy of the
     kind common in our modern world, which is unspoken and scarcely
     realized. The heroine is singularly sympathetic and carefully
     studied, and no reader will be able to avoid the spell of her
     charm.

No. 5 JOHN STREET.-----Richard Whiteing.

     This book, which first brought Mr. Whiteing into fame, is the most
     realistic and powerful of modern studies of slum life.

CLEMENTINA.-----A. E. W. Mason.

     The story of the romantic love match of the Old Pretender, the
     father of Prince Charlie, and how the bride was stolen and carried
     to Italy by the inimitable Captain Wogan. Mr. Mason is the true
     successor of the late Mr. Seton Merriman, and no man living can
     tell a better tale.

THE AMERICAN PRISONER.-----Eden Phillpotts.

     A story of the great war with Napoleon. The scene is laid mainly in
     Devon, and since “Lorna Doone” there has been no better picture of
     the West Country and its people.

JOHN CHARITY.-----H. A. Vachell.

     A story of California in the old days of the Spanish dominion.

LADY AUDLEY’S SECRET.-----Miss Braddon.

     Miss Braddon’s first, best, and most powerful story--a story that
     shares with “East Lynne” the distinction of being the most
     widely-read novel of modern times.

HIS HONOR AND A LADY.-----Sara J. Duncan.

     A story of high Indian politics, in which the great public servant,
     who knows no master but his conscience, is contrasted with the
     time-server, who succeeds where he fails, and steps into his shoes.
     The character of the Lieutenant-Governor is one of the finest
     modern studies of the best type of British administrator.

THE MAN FROM AMERICA.
Mrs. Henry de la Pasture.

     This “sentimental comedy” tells of an old French vicomte who lives
     in Devon, of his grandchildren, and of how the “man from America,”
     the son of a former comrade, appears as a providence to save his
     fortunes. Mrs. De la Pasture has few rivals in the delineation of
     the little worries and tragedies of social life.


BY Mrs. HUMPHRY WARD.

MARCELLA.

     At a time when Socialism is in the air, this novel should be read
     with keen interest. Marcella is a beautiful, high-spirited girl who
     leaves her own class to devote her life to the service of the poor.

THE MARRIAGE OF WILLIAM ASHE.

     This book has been universally acknowledged to be one of the most
     brilliant of modern social studies. The characters are in the main
     drawn from real personages; and apart from the dramatic interest of
     the story, much light is shed on certain aspects of modern
     political life. Its place is with the books that do not die, and it
     is the most attractive and brilliant of all Mrs. Ward’s novels.

ROBERT ELSMERE.

     The famous book which is the parent of all modern theological
     speculations. Comparable in sheer intellectual power to the best
     work of George Eliot, and unquestionably the most notable work of
     fiction that has been produced for years.

THE HISTORY OF DAVID GRIEVE.

OLD GORGON GRAHAM.-----G. H. Lorimer.

     This is a pendant to the “Letters of a Self-Made Merchant,” which
     may be taken as the gospel of the American business man, and which
     has had an unprecedented success in the United States and in this
     country.

THE HOSTS OF THE LORD.-----Flora Annie Steel.

     Mrs. Steel, after Mr. Rudyard Kipling, is the greatest novelist of
     India, and in this volume there is much of her best work. No writer
     has shown more vividly the contrast between the civilized life of
     the Anglo-Indian and the strange native world of ancient fears and
     famine around him.

MOONFLEET.-----J. Meade Falkner.

     The dead Mohunes of Moonfleet, the smugglers who invade their
     vault, a secret cipher, and hidden treasure are amongst the
     ingredients of as spirited, fine-flavoured, and fascinating a tale
     as a man could wish to read.

WHITE FANG.-----Jack London.

     The press says of “White Fang”:--“A masterpiece of its kind. It
     rivals, if it does not surpass, the most magical feats of Mr.
     Kipling’s genius.”--“A powerful and fascinating story.”--“A piece
     of work showing really amazing power.”

OWD BOB.-----Alfred Ollivant.

     This is the saga of a dog, fully equal to Jack London’s “White
     Fang,” and unequalled since “Rab and His Friends.” It is “a fine
     open-air, blood-stirring book, to be enjoyed by all to whom a dog
     is dear.”


_And many other equally interesting works of fiction._





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Princess Sophia, by E. F. Benson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PRINCESS SOPHIA ***

***** This file should be named 58150-0.txt or 58150-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/8/1/5/58150/

Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images available at The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
